Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation I.
Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
Citation for published version (APA):
Dau, T., Kollmeier, B., & Kohlrausch, A. G. (1997). Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation I.
Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 102(5, Pt. 1),
2892-2905. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.420344
DOI:
10.1121/1.420344
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/1997
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 21. Jun. 2026
Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation. I.
Detection and masking with narrow-band carriersa)
Torsten Daub) and Birger Kollmeier
Carl von Ossietzky Universita
¨t Oldenburg, Graduiertenkolleg Psychoakustik, AG Medizinische Physik,
D-26111 Oldenburg, Germany
Armin Kohlrausch
IPO Center for Research on User-System Interaction, P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
͑Received 28 June 1996; accepted for publication 4 August 1997͒
This paper presents a quantitative model for describing data from modulation-detection and
modulation-masking experiments, which extends the model of the ‘‘effective’’ signal processing of
the auditory system described in Dau et al. ͓J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3615–3622 ͑1996͔͒. The new
element in the present model is a modulation ﬁlterbank, which exhibits two domains with different
scaling. In the range 0–10 Hz, the modulation ﬁlters have a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz. Between
10 Hz and 1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling with a constant Q value of 2 was assumed. To preclude
spectral effects in temporal processing, measurements and corresponding simulations were
performed with stochastic narrow-band noise carriers at a high center frequency ͑5 kHz͒. For
conditions in which the modulation rate (fmod
) was smaller than half the bandwidth of the carrier
(⌬f), the model accounts for the low-pass characteristic in the threshold functions ͓e.g., Viemeister,
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 66, 1364–1380 ͑1979͔͒. In conditions with fmod
Ͼ⌬f/2, the model can account
for the high-pass characteristic in the threshold function. In a further experiment, a classical masking
paradigm for investigating frequency selectivity was adopted and translated to the
modulation-frequency domain. Masked thresholds for sinusoidal test modulation in the presence of
a competing modulation masker were measured and simulated as a function of the test modulation
rate. In all cases, the model describes the experimental data to within a few dB. It is proposed that
the typical low-pass characteristic of the temporal modulation transfer function observed with
wide-band noise carriers is not due to ‘‘sluggishness’’ in the auditory system, but can instead be
understood in terms of the interaction between modulation ﬁlters and the inherent ﬂuctuations in the
carrier. © 1997 Acoustical Society of America. ͓S0001-4966͑97͒05611-7͔
PACS numbers: 43.66.Ba, 43.66.Dc, 43.66.Mk ͓JWH͔
INTRODUCTION
Temporal resolution in the auditory system, or the abil-
ity to resolve dynamic acoustic cues, is very important for
the processing of complex sounds. A general psycho-
acoustical approach to describing temporal resolution is to
measure the threshold for detecting changes in the amplitude
of a sound as a function of the rate of the changes. The
function which relates threshold to modulation rate is called
the temporal modulation transfer function ͑TMTF͒ ͑Viemeis-
ter, 1979͒. The TMTF might provide important information
about the processing of temporal envelopes. Since the modu-
lation of a sound modiﬁes its spectrum, wide-band noise is
often used as a carrier signal in order to prevent subjects
from using changes in the overall spectrum as a detection
cue; modulation of white noise does not change its long-term
spectrum ͑e.g., Burns and Viemeister, 1981͒. The subject’s
sensitivity for detecting sinusoidal amplitude modulation of a
broadband noise carrier is high for low modulation rates and
decreases at high modulation rates. It is therefore often ar-
gued that the auditory system is ‘‘sluggish’’ in following fast
temporal envelope ﬂuctuations. Since this sensitivity to
modulation resembles the transfer function of a simple low-
pass ﬁlter, the attenuation characteristic is often interpreted
as the low-pass characteristic of the auditory system. This
view is reﬂected in the structure of a widely accepted model
for describing the TMTF ͑Viemeister, 1979͒.
It is often argued that the auditory ﬁlters play a role in
limiting temporal resolution ͑e.g., Moore and Glasberg,
1986͒, especially at frequencies below 1 kHz where the
bandwidths of the auditory ﬁlters are relatively narrow, lead-
ing to longer impulse responses or ‘‘ringing’’ of the ﬁlters.
However, the response of auditory ﬁlters at high center fre-
quencies is too fast to be a limiting factor in most tasks of
temporal resolution ͑Ronken, 1970; Green, 1973͒. Thus there
must be a process at a more central level of the auditory
system than the peripheral auditory ﬁlters which limits tem-
poral resolution and causes the ‘‘sluggishness’’ in following
fast modulations of the stimulus envelope.
Results from several studies concerning modulation
masking, however, are not consistent with the idea of only
one broad ﬁlter, as reﬂected in the TMTF. Houtgast ͑1989͒
designed experiments to estimate the degree of frequency
selectivity in the perception of simultaneously presented am-
a͒Part of this research was presented at the 129th meeting of the Acoustical
Society of America ͓T. Dau, B. Kollmeier and A. Kohlrausch, ‘‘Modeling
modulation perception: modulation low-pass ﬁlter or modulation ﬁlter-
bank?,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 3273 ͑A͒ ͑1995͔͒.
b͒Corresponding author. Electronic mail: torsten@medi.physik.uni-
oldenburg.de
2892 2892
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 102 (5), Pt. 1, November 1997 0001-4966/97/102(5)/2892/14/$10.00 © 1997 Acoustical Society of America
plitude modulation, using broadband noise as a carrier. Us-
ing narrow bands of noise as the masker modulation, the
modulation-detection threshold function showed a peak at
the masker modulation frequency. This indicates that mask-
ing is most effective when the test modulation frequency
falls within the masker-modulation band. In the same vein,
Bacon and Grantham ͑1989͒ found peaked masking patterns
using sinusoidal masker modulation instead of a noise band.
Fassel ͑1994͒ found similar masking patterns using sinusoids
at high frequencies as carriers and sinusoidal masker modu-
lation.
For spectral tone-on-tone masking, effects of frequency
selectivity are well established and are associated with the
existence of independent frequency channels. When trans-
lated to the modulation-frequency domain, the data of Hout-
gast and of Bacon and Grantham suggest the existence of
modulation-frequency speciﬁc channels at a more central
stage in the auditory system than the peripheral auditory ﬁl-
ters. Yost et al. ͑1989͒ also suggested amplitude modulation
channels to explain their data on modulation-detection inter-
ference and to account for the formation of auditory ‘‘ob-
jects’’ based on common modulation. Similarly, Martens
͑1982͒ proposed that the auditory system realizes some kind
of short-term spectral analysis of the temporal waveform of
the signal’s envelope.
Modulation-frequency speciﬁcity has also been observed
in different physiological studies of neural responses to am-
plitude modulated tones ͑Creutzfeldt et al., 1980; Langner
and Schreiner, 1988; Schreiner and Urbas, 1988; Langner,
1992͒. Langner and Schreiner ͑1988͒ stated that the auditory
system contains several levels of systematic topographical
organization with respect to the response characteristics that
convey temporal modulation aspects of the input signal. A
general reduction in the temporal activity patterns of neural
elements along the auditory pathway was described as the
most basic temporal organizational feature. That is, the tem-
poral resolution of the auditory nerve ͑Palmer, 1982͒ appears
to be higher than at any other processing level. The highest
best modulation frequencies ͑BMF͒ found in the inferior col-
liculus ͑IC͒—which is about 1000 Hz—are still comparable
with the temporal resolution of auditory nerve ﬁbers
͑Schreiner and Langner, 1984; Langner and Schreiner,
1988͒. However, the majority of units in the IC are tuned to
modulation frequencies well below the upper frequency limit
given by the auditory nerve. All estimates of temporal reso-
lution in the IC were found to be higher than estimates in the
auditory cortex ͑which are in the range of BMFϭ0–20 Hz in
cats͒. Thus the auditory cortex seems to be limited in its
ability to follow fast temporal changes in the input envelope.
On the other hand, the cortex seems to be capable of pro-
cessing slow modulations like rhythmlike envelope ﬂuctua-
tions ͑Creutzfeldt et al., 1980͒. A further organizational level
of the temporal processing is reﬂected by differences found
in various subdivisions of auditory nuclei. For example,
Langner and Schreiner ͑1988͒ found a highly systematically
organized map of best modulation frequencies within the IC
of the cat. Overall, Langner and Schreiner ͑1988͒ concluded
that temporal aspects of a stimulus, such as envelope varia-
tions, represent a major organizational principle of the audi-
tory system, that complements the well-established spectral
͑tonotopic͒ and binaural organization.
The present psycho-acoustical study further analyzes the
processing of amplitude modulation in the auditory system.
The goal is to gather more information about modulation-
frequency selectivity and to set up corresponding simulations
with an extended version of a model of the ‘‘effective’’ sig-
nal processing in the auditory system, which was initially
developed to describe temporal masking effects ͑Dau et al.,
1996a, b͒. As already pointed out, in most classical studies of
temporal processing, a broadband noise carrier has been ap-
plied to determine the TMTF. Unfortunately, the use of
broadband noise carriers does not provide direct information
about spectral effects in temporal processing: Broadband
noise excites a wide region of the basilar membrane, leaving
unanswered the question of what spectral region or regions
are being used to detect the modulation. For this reason,
measurements and corresponding simulations with stochastic
narrow-band noises as carriers at a high center frequency
were performed, as was done earlier by Fleischer ͑1982a,
1983͒. At high center frequencies, the bandwidth of the au-
ditory ﬁlters is relatively large so that there is a larger range
of modulation rates over which the sidebands resulting from
the modulation are not resolved. Instead, the modulation is
perceived as a temporal attribute, like ﬂuctuations in loud-
ness ͑for low modulation rates͒ or as roughness ͑for higher
modulation rates͒. The bandwidth of the modulated signal
was chosen to be smaller than the bandwidth of the stimu-
lated peripheral ﬁlter. This implies that all spectral compo-
nents are processed together and that temporal effects are
dominant over spectral effects.
I. DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL
In Dau et al. ͑1996a͒, a model was proposed to describe
the effective signal processing in the auditory system. This
model allows the prediction of masked thresholds in a vari-
ety of simultaneous and nonsimultaneous conditions ͑Dau
et al., 1996b͒. It combines several stages of preprocessing
with a decision device that has the properties of an optimal
detector. Since then, the model has also been used to predict
speech perception tasks, such as automatic speech recogni-
tion and speech quality evaluation ͑cf. Holube and Koll-
meier, 1996; Kollmeier et al., 1996͒. Figure 1 shows the ex-
tended model that is proposed to describe experimental data
on modulation perception. Instead of the implementation of
the basilar-membrane model developed by Strube ͑1985͒, as
used in Dau et al. ͑1996a͒, the gammatone ﬁlterbank model
of Patterson et al. ͑1987͒ is used to simulate the bandpass
characteristics of the basilar membrane. The gammatone ﬁl-
terbank has the advantages that its algorithm is much more
efﬁcient than the Strube model and that the bandwidths more
closely match estimates of auditory-ﬁlter bandwidths. The
signal at the output of a single ﬁlter of the gammatone ﬁlter-
bank is half-wave rectiﬁed and low-pass ﬁltered at 1 kHz, as
in the model described in Dau et al. ͑1996a͒.
The subsequent nonlinear adaptation stage is a slightly
modiﬁed version ͑Mu
¨nkner, 1993͒ of the adaptation stage
͑Pu
¨schel, 1988͒ implemented within the masking model of
Dau et al. ͑1996a͒. In this modiﬁed version the amplitude of
2893 2893
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
the onset response was limited to a value of maximally 10
times the value of the steady state response of the stage ͑for
details see Mu
¨nkner, 1993͒.1 With regard to the transforma-
tion of envelope variations of the signal, the adaptation stage
transforms rapid input variations ͑as compared with the time
constants of the low-pass ﬁlters͒ linearly. If these changes
are slow enough then, because of the time constants of the
model, the gain is also changed. Each element within the
adaptation model combines a static compressive nonlinearity
with a higher sensitivity for fast temporal variations ͑for de-
tails, see Dau et al., 1996a͒.
The following stage in the model, as shown in Fig. 1,
contains the most substantial changes compared to the model
described in Dau et al. ͑1996a͒. Instead of the low-pass ﬁlter
with a cutoff frequency of 8 Hz, a linear ﬁlterbank is as-
sumed to further analyze the amplitude changes of the enve-
lope. This stage will be called the modulation ﬁlterbank
throughout this paper. A ﬁrst implementation of such a
modulation ﬁlterbank was presented in Fassel and Pu
¨schel
͑1993͒ and Mu
¨nker and Pu
¨schel ͑1993͒. The implementation
of this stage is in contrast to the signal processing within
other models in the literature ͑e.g., Viemeister, 1979; Forrest
and Green, 1987͒.
It is postulated within the present model that the modu-
lation ﬁlterbank exhibits two domains with different scaling.
Figure 2 shows the transfer functions of the modulation ﬁl-
ters. In the range 0–10 Hz a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz is
assumed. The lowest modulation ﬁlter represents a low-pass
ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 2.5 Hz. From 10 Hz up to
1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling with a constant Q value of 2 is
assumed.2 The spacing in the modulation-frequency domain
resembles the spacing of critical bands in the audio-
frequency domain. Within the model only the ͑Hilbert͒
envelope of the modulation ﬁlter outputs for center frequen-
cies above 10 Hz is further examined, introducing a nonlin-
earity in the processing of amplitude modulation.3 For ﬁlters
with a lower center frequency it is not reasonable to extract
the Hilbert envelope from the signal, because the distinction
between carrier and envelope becomes ambiguous due to the
large relative bandwidth of these ﬁlters. Furthermore, the
successful description of masking data by the original model
version in Dau et al. ͑1996b͒ suggests that use is made of
information about modulation phase at low modulation rates.
In this model the signal envelope was analyzed by the simple
8-Hz low-pass ﬁlter and this ﬁltering preserves all informa-
tion about the modulation phase for low modulation frequen-
cies. The present model thus tries to ﬁnd a ‘‘link’’ between
the description of phenomena of modulation detection and
those of the more common signal detection.
The output of the ‘‘preprocessing’’ stages can now be
interpreted as a three-dimensional, time-varying activity pat-
tern. Limitations of resolution are again simulated by adding
internal noise with a constant variance to each modulation
ﬁlter output.4 The internal noises at the outputs of the differ-
ent modulation channels are assumed to be independent of
each other. For stochastic input signals, the outputs of the
modulation channels are not ͑fully͒ uncorrelated because of
the overlap of the modulation ﬁlters. The transformed signal
after the addition of noise is called the internal representation
of the signal. The decision device is realized as an optimal
detector in the same way as described in Dau et al. ͑1996a,
b͒. There, the decision device of the model was ﬁrst de-
scribed for masking conditions using sinusoidal test signals
presented in a frozen-noise masker. In each interval of a
simulated 3-interval forced-choice ͑3IFC͒ adaptive para-
digm, the difference between the current representation and
the ‘‘stored’’ internal representation of the deterministic
FIG. 1. Block diagram of the psycho-acoustical model for describing
modulation-detection data with an optimal detector as decision device. The
signals are preprocessed, subjected to adaptation, ﬁltered by a modulation
ﬁlterbank and ﬁnally added to internal noise; this processing transforms the
signals into their internal representations.
FIG. 2. Transfer functions of the modulation ﬁlters. In the range 0–10 Hz
the functions have a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz. Between 10 and 1000 Hz
a logarithmic scaling with a constant Q value of 2 is applied. Only the range
from 0 to 200 Hz is plotted.
2894 2894
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
masker was calculated, leading to two intervals containing
only internal noise and one interval containing the nonlin-
early transformed signal plus internal noise. To apply the
model to random noise, a different sample of the masker was
presented in each interval; the ‘‘reference’’ representation
was modeled by calculating the mean internal representation
of several masker samples ͑cf. Dau et al., 1996b͒. This av-
eraged reference was computed once before the adaptive pro-
cedure was started. During the adaptive procedure, the three
difference representations ͑in a trial͒ were affected by the
statistical properties of the external noise in addition to the
internal noise. Such an algorithm is also used for the present
study dealing with stochastic noise as the carrier ͑and refer-
ence͒ and a sinusoidal modulation ͑as the test signal͒. The
template is generated in the present study as the normalized
difference between an averaged suprathreshold internal rep-
resentation of several modulated carrier samples and the av-
eraged internal representation of the reference alone ͑cf. Dau
et al., 1996b͒. The decision criterion within the optimal de-
cision stage ͑see Green and Swets, 1966͒ is given by the
difference between the largest cross-correlation coefﬁcient of
the two carrier-alone representations with the template and
the correlation value between the representation in the signal
interval and the template. When this difference is smaller
than the limit of resolution determined by the internal noise,
the test modulation is not detected ͑for details, see Dau et al.,
1996b͒.5
II. METHOD
A. Procedure and subjects
Modulation detection thresholds were measured and
simulated using an adaptive 3IFC procedure. The carrier was
presented in three consecutive intervals separated by silent
intervals of 300 ms. In one randomly chosen interval the
carrier was sinusoidally amplitude modulated. In the other
intervals it was unmodulated. The subject’s task was to
specify the interval containing the modulation. During a
threshold run, the modulation depth in dB (20 log m), was
adjusted using a 2-down 1-up rule ͑Levitt, 1971͒ which pro-
vides an estimate of the modulation depth necessary for
70.7% correct responses. The step size was 4 dB at the start
of a run and was divided by 2 after every two reversals of the
modulation depth until the step size reached a minimum of 1
dB, at which time it was ﬁxed. Using this 1-dB step size, 10
reversals were obtained and the median value of the modu-
lation depths at these 10 reversals was used as the threshold
value. The subjects received visual feedback after each re-
sponse. The procedure was repeated four times for each sig-
nal conﬁguration and subject. All ﬁgures show the median
and interquartile ranges based on four single measurements.
All ﬁve subjects had experience in psycho-acoustic measure-
ments and had clinically normal hearing. They were between
23 and 29 years old and participated voluntarily in the study.
B. Apparatus and stimuli
All acoustic stimuli were digitally generated at a sam-
pling frequency of 30 kHz. The stimuli were transformed to
analog signals with the aid of a two-channel 16-bit D/A con-
verter, attenuated, low-pass ﬁltered at 10 kHz, and diotically
presented via headphones ͑HDA 200͒ in a sound-attenuating
booth. Signal generation and presentation were controlled by
a SUN Workstation using a signal-processing software pack-
age developed at the Drittes Physikalisches Institut in Go
¨t-
tingen.
Several modulation-detection and modulation-masking
experiments were performed. In most measurements narrow-
band Gaussian noise centered at 5 kHz was used as the car-
rier. In the masking experiment a sinusoidal carrier at 5 kHz
was used. The carrier level was 65 dB SPL in both cases.
The speciﬁc choice of the parameters for the windowing of
the stimuli will be described later in the paper when the
corresponding experiments are discussed. In the experiments
using a noise carrier, an independent sample of noise was
presented in each interval. With one exception described be-
low, the noise stimuli were digitally ﬁltered before modula-
tion by setting the magnitude of the Fourier coefﬁcients to
zero outside the desired passband.
An amplitude-modulated noise has sidebands that ex-
tend Ϯfm
Hz from the edges of the passband of the unmodu-
lated noise, where fm
indicates the modulation frequency. In
principle it is possible that the detection of modulation is
based on spectral changes in the modulated waveform. The
usability of these spectral cues depends on frequency region,
owing to the relation of frequency difference limens and cen-
ter frequency ͑Wier et al., 1977; Eddins, 1993͒. One way to
avoid these spectral cues is to apply the modulation to wide-
band noise before bandpass ﬁltering. In the present study this
was done for the largest applied carrier bandwidth, 314 Hz,
by setting the magnitude of the Fourier coefﬁcients to zero
outside the desired passband. This is the same procedure that
was applied by Eddins ͑1993͒. Thus in this case, the band-
width of the stimuli is the same regardless of the presence or
absence of modulation. By ﬁltering after amplitude modula-
tion, the sidebands introduced by modulation are effectively
reduced. The ﬁltering after modulation causes a partially ﬁll-
ing in the valleys of the temporal waveform ͑e.g., Eddins,
1993͒. However, this technique ensures that spectral cues
were not available and the task was purely temporal in na-
ture. In contrast, for the carrier bandwidths of 3 and 31 Hz,
no ﬁltering after modulation was applied.
When generating amplitude-modulated narrow-band
stimuli, the average power of the modulated signal is in-
creased by 1ϩm2/2 compared with the unmodulated signal.
For large modulation depths, detection might therefore be
based on changes in overall intensity rather than on the pres-
ence or absence of modulation. To eliminate level cues, the
digital waveforms were adjusted to have equal power in each
interval of the forced-choice trial.
In most cases sinusoidal test modulation with zero onset
phase was applied. In one experiment a complex modulator
was used, consisting of ﬁve adjacent components of a har-
monic tone complex. In each case the carrier and the applied
modulators were windowed with a length depending on the
particular experiment.
2895 2895
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
III. RESULTS
A. Amplitude-modulation thresholds of narrow-band
noise as a function of the carrier bandwidth
In this experiment, TMTFs were measured and simu-
lated for narrow-band noise carriers of bandwidths 3, 31, and
314 Hz, centered at 5 kHz in each condition ͑cf. Fleischer,
1982a, 1983͒. Fleischer’s experiments were replicated in this
study and compared with corresponding simulations carried
out with the present model. In contrast to Fleischer, an adap-
tive threshold procedure was used and the carrier level was
somewhat lower ͑65 dB SPL͒. For the three noise band-
widths, the corresponding spectrum levels were about 60, 50,
and 40 dB SPL. The carrier and the applied sinusoidal modu-
lation had a duration of 1 s. Both were windowed with
200-ms cosine-squared ramps. Figure 3 shows the present
experimental results for amplitude modulation detection em-
ploying a carrier bandwidth of 3 Hz at a center frequency of
5 kHz. The ﬁgure shows the data of three subjects ͑open
symbols͒ together with the model predictions ͑closed sym-
bols͒. For comparison, data obtained by one subject using a
sinusoidal carrier at 5 kHz are shown as asterisks. For the
sinusoidal carrier, the same stimulus parameters were used as
for the noise carrier conditions. The ordinate indicates modu-
lation depth at threshold, and the abscissa represents the
modulation frequency. A comparatively high detection
threshold is observed at a modulation rate of 3 Hz. This is
due to the inherent statistical ﬂuctuations of the narrow-band
3-Hz-wide carrier. These inherent ﬂuctuations of the carrier
envelope mask the additional periodic 3-Hz test modulation.
With increasing modulation frequency, thresholds decrease
and converge with those obtained using a sinusoidal carrier
at a modulation frequency of 20 Hz. The threshold remains
ﬂat up to a modulation frequency of 100 Hz. This ﬁnding
indicates that the auditory system does not seem too slow or
sluggish to follow fast ﬂuctuations in this range. There is
very good agreement between the measurements and simu-
lations. The ﬂat threshold function up to 100 Hz contrasts
with the conclusions derived from modulation detection data
for broadband noise carriers ͑e.g., Viemeister, 1979͒ and also
contrasts with data in Zwicker ͑1952͒ obtained with a sinu-
soidal carrier. Zwicker found an increase in threshold be-
tween 4 and 64 Hz of about 9 dB at a carrier frequency of 4
kHz. However, the present data are in good agreement with
more recent data by Fleischer ͑1982a, 1983͒, Fassel ͑1994͒,
Fassel and Kohlrausch ͑1995͒, Dau ͑1996͒, and Fassel et al.
͑1997͒, who measured TMTFs with sinusoidal carriers at 5
and 10 kHz.
Flat thresholds up to a modulation frequency of 128 Hz
were also observed by Strickland and Viemeister ͑1997͒ in
an experiment where subjects had to discriminate between
AM and quasi-frequency modulation ͑QFM͒ applied to a
sinusoidal carrier of 4 kHz. Based on additional data on
QFM detection, these authors argued that the ﬂatness in their
TMTF between 64 and 128 Hz may have been caused by the
increasing role of spectral cues and thus did not reﬂect true
temporal processing. Since the assumptions about available
cues are of relevance for the interpretation of our data, we
will return to the arguments put forward by Strickland and
Viemeister in the discussion ͑Sec. V͒ of the present paper.
Figure 4 shows thresholds using a narrow-band carrier
with a bandwidth of 31 Hz. Again, the modulation depth, m,
at threshold was measured and simulated as a function of the
test-modulation frequency. The open symbols represent the
measured data of three subjects and the ﬁlled symbols indi-
cate the simulated thresholds. The threshold at a very low
modulation rate ͑3 Hz͒ is several dB lower than in the case of
the 3-Hz-wide carrier. This decrease is due to the decreasing
spectral energy density in the modulation spectrum with in-
creasing bandwidth of the carrier ͑see the Appendix͒. In
terms of the model, less ‘‘noise energy’’ falls into the low-
frequency modulation ﬁlter which is tuned to the test-
modulation frequency. For modulation frequencies larger
than half the bandwidth of the noise (fmod
Ͼ⌬f/2) thresholds
begin to decrease, both in the measurements and in the simu-
lations, so that a high-pass characteristic in the threshold
function becomes apparent. However, thresholds decrease
more slowly with increasing modulation frequency than the
FIG. 3. Modulation-detection thresholds of sinusoidal amplitude modulation
as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a 3-Hz-wide
running noise at a center frequency of 5 kHz. Carrier and modulation dura-
tion: 1 s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: JV ͑ᮀ͒; AS ͑छ͒; TD ͑᭺͒; optimal
detector ͑᭹͒. In addition, the modulation detection thresholds of one subject
͑TD͒ for a 5-kHz sinusoidal carrier are indicated by ͑Ã͒.
FIG. 4. Modulation-detection thresholds of sinusoidal amplitude modulation
as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a 31-Hz-wide
running noise at a center frequency of 5 kHz. Carrier and modulation dura-
tion: 1 s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: AS ͑छ͒; TD ͑᭺͒; JV ͑ᮀ͒; optimal
detector ͑᭹͒.
2896 2896
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
spectrum of the inherent envelope ﬂuctuations itself ͑e.g.,
Lawson and Uhlenbeck, 1950͒. The idealized modulation
spectrum of a rectangular shaped bandpass noise has a trian-
gular shape which stretches from 0 to ⌬f Hz ͑see the Ap-
pendix and Lawson and Uhlenbeck, 1950͒. If the auditory
system would be sharply tuned in frequency selectivity for
modulation, thresholds would decrease with increasing
modulation frequency more or less in parallel with the spec-
tral shape of the modulation spectrum of the carrier ͑assum-
ing a constant signal-to-noise ratio at the output͒. Appar-
ently, this is not the case. Hence, even at high modulation
rates of 100 and 150 Hz, thresholds have not yet converged
with those for the 3-Hz-wide carrier nor with those for the
sinusoidal carrier, but are about 5 dB higher. This implies
that the relatively slow inherent ﬂuctuations of the 31-Hz-
wide carrier make it difﬁcult to detect the higher-frequency
test modulation. This phenomenon was also observed by
Fleischer ͑1982a͒ who referred to it as ‘‘cross-talk’’ of the
inherent ﬂuctuations of the noise on the added modulation.
This effect decreases with increasing rate of the test modu-
lation.
This experiment reveals much about the auditory sys-
tem’s selectivity for modulation frequency. In the model it
was necessary to use wide modulation ﬁlters (Qϭ2) at high
modulation frequencies so that some energy from the low-
frequency ﬂuctuations of the ‘‘masker’’ leaks through a
modulation ﬁlter that is tuned to a high modulation fre-
quency ͑like 150 Hz͒. This leakage decreases the signal-to-
noise ratio and therefore leads to a higher detection threshold
at fmod
ϭ150 Hz than would be the case for a more sharply
tuned ﬁlter. Again, there is good agreement between the
form of the simulated and measured data.
Figure 5 shows results for the carrier bandwidth of 314
Hz. Thresholds are higher for a modulation rate of 3 Hz than
for a rate of 5 Hz. This is probably caused by the use of a
gated carrier. Such an effect has been observed in several
psycho-acoustical studies ͑e.g., Viemeister, 1979; Sheft and
Yost, 1990͒. Based on their results it can be assumed that the
threshold at 3 Hz would decrease if a continuous carrier had
been used instead of a gated one. For modulation frequencies
above 7 Hz, thresholds increase by about 3 dB per doubling
of the modulation frequency. This threshold pattern agrees
well with comparable experimental data of Eddins ͑1993͒ for
a carrier bandwidth of 400 Hz. The form of the TMTF is
similar to the pattern found in ‘‘classical’’ measurements of
the TMTF using a broadband noise as a carrier, but it has a
much lower cutoff frequency ͑Viemeister, 1979͒. Overall,
the threshold curve is very different from those obtained with
smaller carrier bandwidths since the detectability of the test
modulation decreases with increasing modulation frequency.
Consistent with the data, the simulations also show increas-
ing thresholds with increasing modulation frequency.
For a carrier bandwidth of 314 Hz, the spectrum of the
intrinsic ﬂuctuations is relatively ﬂat over the whole range of
the test-modulation frequencies. The additional test compo-
nent falls in the passband of mainly one modulation ﬁlter.
Assuming a constant decision criterion at threshold, the loga-
rithmic scaling of the modulation ﬁlters with center frequen-
cies above 10 Hz leads to an approximately 3-dB increase of
modulation depth, m, at threshold per doubling of modula-
tion frequency. In other words, to get the same signal-to-
noise ratio at threshold, a greater modulation depth is re-
quired with increasing modulation frequency. Thus the
apparent modulation low-pass behavior in the model data in
Fig. 5 is not explained by assuming a general low-pass char-
acteristic in the auditory system, but is caused by the con-
stant relative width ͑or logarithmic scaling͒ of the modula-
tion ﬁlters.
Figure 6 gives an illustration of how the signals are in-
ternally represented in the model. It shows how the template
is derived from the internal representation of suprathreshold
test modulation and that of the unmodulated carrier alone.
The upper panel shows the three-dimensional internal repre-
sentation of a 3-Hz-wide carrier alone ͑centered at 5 kHz͒. It
represents the internal activity as a function of time and cen-
ter frequency of the modulation ﬁlters. The ordinate is scaled
in model units ͑MU͒. The modulation center frequencies
range from 0 to 1000 Hz. Since the total energy within the
modulation spectrum of the signal is concentrated at very
low modulation rates, only the lowest modulation ﬁlters are
excited by the input signal. This is indicated by the hatched
lines in the ﬁgure. At the beginning of the carrier, all modu-
lation ﬁlters show a short period of high excitation. This
response reﬂects the step response of the ﬁlters to the enve-
lope onset. The middle panel of Fig. 6 shows the internal
representation of the carrier, this time sinusoidally modu-
lated with a test-modulation rate of 20 Hz at a highly detect-
able modulation depth. The test modulation mainly activates
the modulation ﬁlter tuned to 20 Hz but also stimulates ad-
jacent modulation ﬁlters, because of the relatively low
modulation-frequency selectivity assumed in the model.
Again, the inherent ﬂuctuations of the carrier itself primarily
activate the region at low modulation frequencies. However,
because of the large spectral separation between the test
modulation and the inherent ﬂuctuations of the carrier, there
is no interaction between the two components; that is, no
competing ‘‘noise’’ energy leaks into the transfer range of
the test-modulation ﬁlter. The lower panel in Fig. 6 gives the
FIG. 5. Modulation-detection thresholds of sinusoidal amplitude modulation
as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a 314-Hz-wide
running noise at a center frequency of 5 kHz. Carrier and modulation dura-
tion: 1 s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: JV ͑ᮀ͒; TD ͑᭺͒; AS ͑छ͒; optimal
detector ͑᭹͒.
2897 2897
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
template which is derived by subtracting the upper panel
from the middle one and normalizing the result. As a conse-
quence of the marked separation in modulation frequency,
the internal representation of the template contains a repre-
sentation of the temporal course of the test modulation with-
out interference from the carrier modulation.
B. Amplitude modulation thresholds of third-octave-
wide noisebands as a function of the center
frequency
In the previous section it was observed that the detection
threshold for amplitude modulation depends on the spectral
density of the inherent ﬂuctuations of the carrier, when the
total energy of the modulated signal is constant. This is ex-
amined further in the following experiment using a third-
octave-wave noiseband as the carrier. The detection thresh-
old for 25-Hz modulation was measured and simulated as a
function of the center frequency of the band. Stimulus pa-
rameters were the same as in the experiments of the previous
section. In the model, only the output of the peripheral ﬁlter
centered on the bandpass noise was analyzed. It was further
assumed that the scaling of the modulation ﬁlters does not
change with the peripheral frequency region. Figure 7 shows
the modulation depth at threshold as a function of the center
FIG. 6. Generation of the template representation ͑at the bottom͒ of a 20-Hz test modulation which was impressed on a 3-Hz-wide running noise carrier
centered at 5 kHz. The template is the normalized difference between the mean representation of the carrier plus the suprathreshold modulation ͑in the middle͒
and the mean representation of the carrier alone ͑at the top͒. The ordinate is scaled in model units ͑MU͒.
2898 2898
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
frequency of the third-octave-wide noiseband. Modulation
thresholds decrease with increasing center frequency. The
increasing absolute bandwidth results in a decreasing density
of inherent low-frequency envelope ﬂuctuations, if the total
energy of the modulated stimulus is kept constant. As a con-
sequence, less energy from the random envelope ﬂuctuations
of the carrier falls within the passband of the modulation
ﬁlter tuned to the test-modulation frequency. This leads to
decreasing thresholds with increasing center frequency in the
model. Apart from the systematic 2- to 3-dB difference in the
absolute sensitivity, there is good agreement between the
simulated and the measured data.
C. Modulation masking: a harmonic tone-complex
masker
In a further experiment concerning modulation-
frequency selectivity, a masking paradigm for investigating
frequency selectivity in the audio-frequency domain was
adopted. It served as a test for spectral analysis in the modu-
lation domain, as opposed to a periodicity analysis. The car-
rier was a 5-kHz sinusoid. A narrow-band tone complex was
used as masker modulation. This complex consisted of the
third through seventh components of a harmonic tone com-
plex with a fundamental frequency of 30 Hz, with frequen-
cies of 90, 120, 150, 180, and 210 Hz. The amplitude of each
component was 0.16, a value sufﬁciently low to avoid over-
modulation when the test modulation was combined with the
tone-complex modulation. In each interval, the starting phase
of each spectral component was randomly chosen from a
uniform distribution in the range 0–360°. With this choice,
the modulating tone complex had a noiselike, but periodic,
waveform. A sinusoidal test modulation was imposed on the
same carrier. The test modulation was chosen from the range
20–120 Hz. Thus the bandwidth of the modulated signal
remained within the bandwidth of the auditory ﬁlter centered
at 5 kHz. Figure 8 shows schematically the spectral distribu-
tion of the masker and test components in the modulation
spectrum. The modulated stimuli were presented at a level of
65 dB SPL, and had a duration of 400 ms. Test and masker
modulation were present for the whole duration of the carrier
and were gated with 20-ms cosine-squared ramps.
The amount of modulation masking as a function of the
test-modulation frequency is shown in Fig. 9. The unmasked
modulation thresholds, i.e., the thresholds for sinusoidal test
modulation without any interfering masker modulation, were
used as a reference to evaluate the effect of the modulated
masker. These reference thresholds were similar across sub-
jects and were similar to those described in the ﬁrst experi-
ment of this paper ͑see Fig. 3͒, remaining more or less ﬂat up
to a modulation frequency of 120 Hz. The ‘‘masking pat-
tern’’ was derived by subtracting the unmasked threshold
from the masked threshold at each test-modulation fre-
quency. As can be seen from Fig. 9, the amount of masking
increases with increasing test-modulation frequency. The dif-
ference between the highest and the lowest threshold was
more than 10 dB. Note that there is no peak at 30 Hz, the
‘‘missing fundamental.’’ This indicates that the masking ef-
fect is not determined by the period of the masker modula-
tion. Also, no pronounced peak in threshold is observed for
FIG. 7. Modulation-detection thresholds for a 25-Hz modulation as a func-
tion of the center frequency of a third-octave-wide noise carrier. Carrier and
modulation duration: 1 s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: Data from Fleischer
͑1981͒ ͑ᮀ͒; TD ͑᭺͒; JV ͑᭞͒, optimal detector ͑᭹͒.
FIG. 8. Logarithmic spectrum of the Hilbert envelope of the stimuli pre-
sented in the signal interval of the modulation masking experiment. The
signal interval contains the ﬁve components of the masking tone complex
and the signal component. The subject’s task was to detect the signal com-
ponent.
FIG. 9. Amount of modulation masking as a function of the modulation
frequency. Carrier: 5-kHz sinusoid, modulation masker: 3rd–7th compo-
nents of a harmonic tone complex with fundamental f0
ϭ30 Hz. Level: 65
dB SPL. Subjects: TD ͑᭺͒; JV ͑छ͒; optimal detector ͑᭹͒.
2899 2899
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
modulation frequencies of 90 and 120 Hz, corresponding to
the lowest harmonic components of the masker complex.
This indicates that no sharp tuning in modulation frequencies
occurs at these comparatively high modulation frequencies.
An increasing masking effect with increasing test modulation
frequency is also seen in the simulations ͑ﬁlled symbols in
Fig. 9͒. If masking effects in the modulation-frequency do-
main were determined by the periodicity of the stimuli one
would expect an increased threshold at the fundamental fre-
quency of the tone complex and at higher harmonics. If,
however, the masked threshold of the test signal were mainly
determined by the auditory system’s frequency selectivity for
modulation, one could conclude that the system performs a
modulation analysis which is comparable and analogous to
the ‘‘critical-band’’ ﬁltering on the basilar membrane. The
experimental data clearly suggest the latter case. The simu-
lations show good agreement with the experimental data.
However, there is a systematic difference of 2–4 dB between
the measured and simulated masking patterns. The masked
threshold is directly related to the amount of masker energy
falling within the passband of the modulation ﬁlter tuned to
the actual test modulation. For the lowest test modulation
rate ͑20 Hz͒ there is only a very small masking effect in the
model since the modulation ﬁlters in the low modulation-
frequency region are assumed to be relatively sharply tuned
͑see Fig. 2͒. With increasing test-modulation frequency,
more and more components of the masker contribute to
masking. Also, in the simulations the difference between the
highest and the lowest masked threshold amounts to nearly
10 dB. These results further support the notion of
modulation-frequency selectivity, although this selectivity
seems to be relatively broadly tuned.
IV. COMPARISON WITH PREDICTIONS OF
VIEMEISTER’S MODEL FOR MODULATION
DETECTION
The modulation ﬁlterbank concept differs considerably
in its structure from the ‘‘classical’’ modulation low-pass
ﬁlter approach ͑e.g., Viemeister, 1979͒. In this section, pre-
dictions of the modulation low-pass ﬁlter approach are inves-
tigated and compared with the performance of the modula-
tion ﬁlterbank model.
The structure of Viemeister’s model incorporates a pre-
detection bandpass ﬁlter ͑with a bandwidth of ⌬f
ϭ2000 Hz͒ which is followed by a nonlinearity ͑half-wave
rectiﬁcation͒ and a low-pass ﬁlter. Viemeister ﬁtted the cut-
off frequency of the low-pass ﬁlter to the TMTF data ob-
tained with a broadband noise carrier. The resulting cutoff
frequency was 64 Hz. As a decision variable he suggested
the ac-coupled root-mean-square ͑rms͒ value of the output of
the low-pass ﬁlter which was calculated over the duration of
the observation interval. The thresholds were deﬁned as the
modulation depth necessary to produce a certain average in-
crement ͑in dB͒ in the rms value, compared to that for an
unmodulated noise.
Figure 10 shows simulated TMTFs for noise carriers of
3-, 31-, 314-, 2000-, and 6000-Hz bandwidth on the basis of
Viemeister’s model. The narrow-band stimuli were the same
as in Figs. 3–5. All curves show a low-pass characteristic
with a similar cutoff frequency. This characteristic reﬂects
the inﬂuence of the low-pass ﬁlter stage. With decreasing
carrier bandwidth, the simulated TMTFs shift toward higher
thresholds. For the output of Viemeister’s model, this in-
crease will be seen for carrier bandwidths that are less than
the bandwidth of the predetection ﬁlter and greater than the
cutoff frequency of the low-pass ﬁlter. For these conditions,
the ac-coupled rms value of the unmodulated noise carrier at
the output of the modulation low-pass stage increases with
decreasing carrier bandwidth.
At very low modulation frequencies, the increase in
threshold agrees qualitatively with the experimental data. At
higher modulation frequencies, however, the model predicts
a totally different threshold pattern than that observed ex-
perimentally.
While the pattern of the experimental data varies sys-
tematically with increasing carrier bandwidth, the model al-
ways predicts a low-pass characteristic in the threshold func-
tion independent of the carrier bandwidth. Note that the
model proposed here provides a better description of the ex-
perimental data ͑cf. see Sec. III A, Figs. 3–5͒.
Figure 11 shows model predictions of amplitude modu-
FIG. 10. Simulations on the basis of Viemeister’s model. Predicted modu-
lation detection thresholds are shown for ﬁve different bandwidths of the
noise carrier. Center frequency of the carrier: 5 kHz. Carrier bandwidth: ࡗ:
3 Hz; ᭡: 31 Hz; ᭿: 314 Hz; ᭢: 2000 Hz; ᭹: 6000 Hz.
FIG. 11. Simulated modulation detection thresholds for 25-Hz amplitude
modulation as a function of the center frequency of the third-octave-wide
noise carrier. Viemeister model: ͑᭿͒; modulation ﬁlterbank model ͑᭹͒.
2900 2900
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
lation detection thresholds of third-octave-noise bands as a
function of the center frequency. The stimuli were the same
as in Sec. III B. The ﬁlled squares represent thresholds on the
basis of the Viemeister model. Thresholds decrease mono-
tonically with increasing center frequency. This is again
caused by the decreasing ac-coupled rms value of the un-
modulated noise with increasing center frequency ͑and in-
creasing linear bandwidth͒ at the output of the modulation
low-pass stage, in the same way as described above. The
ﬁlled circles in the ﬁgure show the simulated data obtained
with the modulation ﬁlterbank model ͑replotted from Fig. 7͒.
There is virtually no difference between the predictions of
the two models. The predicted threshold functions account
well for the data ͑see Fig. 7͒.
Finally, model predictions were calculated for the
modulation-masking experiment with the harmonic tone
complex as the masker. The stimuli were the same as in Sec.
III C. The model of Viemeister predicts about 5-dB masking
for all test-modulation frequencies. This frequency-
independent masking is caused by the speciﬁc model struc-
ture: Because there is only one modulation-frequency spe-
ciﬁc channel ͑the output of the low-pass ﬁlter͒ the effect of
the masker modulation is the same for all test modulation
frequencies at least in combination with the decision algo-
rithm proposed by Viemeister ͑1979͒. Hence the experimen-
tally observed increase in modulation masking with decreas-
ing spectral distance between modulation masker and test
modulation cannot be described properly with Viemeister’s
model.
While this paper was being written, a recent article by
Strickland and Viemeister ͑1996͒ showed that by replacing
the rms criterion with a max/min statistic, a single-channel
envelope detector can capture some aspects of modulation
masking data, so that the effect of masker modulation is not
the same at all test modulation rates. However, their model
predictions showed a much too sharp ‘‘tuning’’ to modula-
tion frequency compared to the relatively broadly tuned
masking patterns found in the data ͑Houtgast, 1989; Bacon
and Grantham, 1989͒. In order to better understand the prop-
erties of such statistics, we repeated the simulations shown in
Fig. 10 using a max/min decision device. Basically, the
change in detector criterion from rms to max/min does not
change the main aspects of the previously discussed curves:
Independent of carrier bandwidth, all TMTFs have the same
shape and increase with increasing modulation frequency.
For a reduction of the carrier bandwidth between 2000 and
about 30 Hz, the TMTFs are shifted toward higher threshold
values. In addition, as already mentioned by Forrest and
Green ͑1987͒, the max/min statistic is less stable than the
rms statistic.
In summary, the analysis of various models proposed in
the literature and the simulations from the present study pro-
vide a strong indication for a modulation-frequency speciﬁc
analysis in the auditory system. The modulation ﬁlterbank
model, which is able to reproduce at least the trend in the
data, is one possible realization for this analysis.
V. DISCUSSION
The main goal of this study was to develop a model
which describes the effective processing of envelope ﬂuctua-
tions in the auditory system. Experiments concerning modu-
lation detection and modulation masking were performed
which suggest that the auditory system realizes some kind of
spectral decomposition of the temporal envelope of the sig-
nals. There seem to be channels in the auditory system which
are tuned to modulation frequency, much like there are chan-
nels ͑critical bands or auditory ﬁlters͒ tuned to spectral fre-
quency.
With regard to the experiments performed and the struc-
ture of the model that is inferred from these data, the follow-
ing points should be discussed: ͑a͒ the assumption that the
use of spectral cues, effects of peripheral ﬁltering, and off-
frequency listening can be neglected for the conditions tested
in this paper; ͑b͒ the concept of a modulation ﬁlterbank as
opposed to a modulation low-pass ﬁlter in each critical band;
and ͑c͒ the envelope statistics of the different noise maskers
employed and their inﬂuence on the thresholds obtained
here.
A. Role of spectral cues, peripheral ﬁltering, and off-
frequency listening
The experiments in this study have been designed so as
to minimize effects of spectral cues and peripheral ﬁltering.
The carrier frequency was very high and therefore the band-
width of the modulated signals was always smaller than the
bandwidth of the stimulated peripheral ﬁlter. We also argued
that at a carrier frequency of 5 kHz, temporal cues are domi-
nant over spectral cues in modulation detection for modula-
tion frequencies up to at least 100 Hz, a view we ﬁnd sup-
ported by measurements with sinusoidal carriers ͑see Sec.
III A, and Fleischer, 1982a, 1983; Fassel and Kohlrausch,
1995, 1996; Dau, 1996; Fassel et al., 1997͒.
A somewhat different view about the ﬂatness of TMTFs
for tonal carriers at 4 kHz was put forward in a recent paper
by Strickland and Viemeister ͑1997͒. Based on data for dis-
crimination between AM and QFM, and on data for detect-
ing QFM, they argued that the thresholds for AM vs QFM at
a modulation frequency of 128 Hz were not just caused by
temporal cues ͑as we assume͒, but that other, probably spec-
tral cues, were also involved. It is further implied that this
may also be the reason for the ﬂatness in tonal TMTFs at 3
and 5 kHz in Fassel and Kohlrausch ͑1996͒ and Dau ͑1996͒,
which would undermine one of the assumptions used in our
interpretation. In the following we argue why we ﬁnd this
implication not convincing.
According to Strickland and Viemeister, the sensitivity
to temporal cues alone would lead to an increase in thresh-
olds for AM vs QFM discrimination above 64-Hz modula-
tion frequency. Only due to the availability of additional
cues, thresholds appear to be ﬂat up to 128 Hz. The usability
of these additional cues is derived from experiments measur-
ing QFM detection. At a 4-kHz carrier frequency and 128-Hz
modulation frequency, QFM detection thresholds are about 8
dB higher than the thresholds for discriminating AM from
QFM. These differences in level make it, in our view, very
difﬁcult to see room for a reasonable contribution of nontem-
2901 2901
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
poral cues, unless it was shown that the psychometric func-
tion for QFM detection was sufﬁciently shallow.
If we compare AM detection thresholds at a wider range
of carrier frequencies, the interpretation by Strickland and
Viemeister leads to the following view. Data by Zwicker
͑1952͒ show that QFM detection thresholds as a function of
modulation frequency decrease earlier for lower than for
higher carrier frequencies and that the shift in shape is about
1 oct in modulation frequency per 1 oct in carrier frequency
͑cf. Figs. 10 and 11 in Zwicker, 1952͒. If we make the par-
simonous assumption that the contribution of nontemporal
cues to AM vs QFM discrimination follows the same basic
rules across carrier frequencies, the modulation frequency at
which nontemporal cues start to contribute should be lower
than 128 Hz for carrier frequencies below 5 kHz and higher
than 128 Hz for carriers above 5 kHz. Our own results on
AM detection for sinusoidal carriers do not show such be-
havior ͑Fassel and Kohlrausch, 1995; Dau, 1996; Fassel
et al., 1997͒. For all carrier frequencies between 3 and 10
kHz, AM detection thresholds remain ﬂat up to the same
modulation frequency of about 100 to 130 Hz.
Another problem in interpreting AM detection thresh-
olds is that observers may increase the relative modulation
depth in the AM stimulus by positioning their ‘‘internal ob-
servation ﬁlter’’ away from the carrier frequency in such a
way as to better equate the amplitude of the carrier and one
of the sidebands ͑e.g., Goldstein, 1967͒. The increase in rela-
tive modulation depth resulting from listening off frequency
would improve performance. We think that for 5-kHz carri-
ers and modulation frequencies in the range 0–100 Hz, it is
unlikely that this type of off-frequency listening would be
advantageous, and that subjects most likely monitor the in-
ternal ﬁlter at the carrier frequency.
First of all, the ͑relative͒ frequency difference between
carrier and one of the sidebands is no larger than 2%, which
corresponds to about 0.15 ERB or 0.1 Bark. In order to in-
crease the modulation depth m at the output of an off-
frequency ﬁlter by 2 dB, this ﬁlter would need to have a
slope of 6 dB per 100 Hz ͑assuming a constant slope over the
spectrum of the AM stimulus͒. This corresponds at 5 kHz to
slopes of about 33 dB/ERB or 56 dB/Bark, values clearly
higher than typical estimates of auditory ﬁlter slopes.
In addition, if this effect contributes to AM detection, it
should be even stronger in single-sideband detection. If only
one sideband and the carrier are available, optimal placing of
a ﬁlter away from the carrier will increase the degree of
modulation even more than is possible for modulation detec-
tion, where the ͑relative͒ increase of one sideband is accom-
panied by a decrease of the other sideband. Both for 5-kHz
͑Dau, 1996͒ and 10-kHz carriers ͑Fassel et al., 1997͒, we
found basically ﬂat thresholds for detecting the lower or the
upper sideband up to about 100 Hz. Even more important is
the observation that sideband detection thresholds for larger
spectral distances ﬁrst increased, before they ﬁnally de-
creased. We take this as an indication that monitoring an
off-frequency ﬁlter cannot signiﬁcantly inﬂuence TMTFs at
5 kHz for modulation frequencies up to at least 100 Hz.
Alternatively, off-frequency listening could inﬂuence
modulation detection for narrow-band carriers by the in-
creased internal modulation depth in the region of upward
spread of excitation. Such a mechanism has been proposed in
the past as one of the sources for the level dependence of
AM detection thresholds for sinusoidal carriers ͑e.g.,
Zwicker, 1956; Maiwald, 1967b͒. According to Strickland
and Viemeister ͑1997͒, it also affects thresholds for low
modulation frequencies in the case of bandlimited noise car-
riers. This conclusion was based on the fact that by adding
unmodulated notched noise designed to mask the region of
upward spread of a bandlimited noise carrier, modulation-
detection thresholds increased by up to 7 dB. Based on this
result, it was argued that measuring modulation thresholds
without a notched noise would not reveal true temporal pro-
cessing within the auditory ﬁlter centered on the carrier.
Interestingly, the usability of nonlinear upward spread in
modulation detection for noise carriers has been addressed
theoretically and by model simulations earlier by Maiwald
͑1967b͒ and we will recall the relevant points here. In the
region of upward spread, both the inherent ﬂuctuations of the
noise carrier and the applied AM will be enhanced in a simi-
lar way. As long as the intrinsic ﬂuctuations of the carrier are
the limiting factor for modulation detection, the upward
spread region does not allow a better detectability than the
on-frequency region. This contrasts to the situation for sinu-
soidal carriers, where only the applied modulation, but not
the limiting ͑internal͒ noise are enhanced in the region of
upward spread.
Second, if nonlinear upward spread indeed plays such a
signiﬁcant role as stated by Strickland and Viemeister
͑1997͒, modulation thresholds for bandlimited noise carriers
should strongly increase with decreasing carrier level, since
the availability of nonlinear upward spread is strongly re-
duced at low and medium carrier levels. Data by Maiwald
͑1967b͒ for a 127-Hz-wide noise carrier at 1 kHz show that
detection thresholds for 4-Hz modulation vary by no more
than 2 dB for a level variation of 60 dB. In contrast, the same
level variation for a sinusoidal carrier reveals a 15-dB effect.
This suggests that the results of Strickland and Viemeister
were not primarily due to the masking of the upward spread
of excitation.
Following from these considerations we conclude that
for the conditions investigated in the present study, monitor-
ing off-frequency ﬁlters does not contribute signiﬁcantly to
modulation detection and we can indeed attribute the thresh-
olds to being based on temporal, rather than on spectral cues.
Of course, in modulation-detection conditions with car-
rier bandwidths larger than a critical band, the inﬂuence of
peripheral ﬁltering on the processing of modulation frequen-
cies can no longer be neglected. For such conditions, an ex-
tension of the ‘‘single-channel’’ model is required that al-
lows integration of signal information across frequency.
Such an extension of the single-channel model to a multi-
channel model, that is able to simulate effects of spectral
integration in amplitude-modulation detection and masking,
is described in the accompanying paper ͑Dau et al., 1997͒.
2902 2902
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
B. Modulation ﬁlterbank versus modulation low-pass
ﬁlter
The modulation ﬁlterbank concept proposed here is dif-
ferent both from the previous version of the current model
͑cf. Dau et al., 1996a, b͒ and from models proposed in the
literature ͑e.g., Viemeister, 1979͒. Both of these models em-
ployed some kind of a modulation low-pass ﬁlter. The pre-
vious version of the current model was developed to describe
simultaneous and forward masking data and included a low-
pass ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 8 Hz. Such low-pass
ﬁltering, however, would fail to describe experiments con-
cerning modulation masking and would also fail to describe
basic experiments concerning modulation detection with
narrow-band carriers at high center frequencies ͑cf. Sec.
III A͒. The present model allows the prediction of modula-
tion data and, at the same time, preserves the capabilities of
the earlier model for describing simultaneous and nonsimul-
taneous masking data. This is because the linear modulation
low-pass ﬁltering ͑with a cutoff frequency at very slow
modulations͒ is retained in the current model and is com-
bined with the analysis of faster modulations by a modula-
tion ﬁlterbank. The idea behind the modulation low-pass ﬁl-
ter approach described in the literature ͑cf. Viemeister, 1979͒
is that a ‘‘minimum integration time’’ is typically derived
from the cutoff frequency of the low-pass characteristic in
the threshold function as a parameter that describes the au-
ditory system’s temporal resolution ͑for a review, see Vie-
meister and Plack, 1993͒. Such a model is capable of pre-
dicting a variety of different experiments, for example, the
TMTF for broadband noise carriers ͑cf. Fig. 5͒ and modula-
tion thresholds in third-octave band noise at different center
frequencies ͑cf. Fig. 11͒. However, a model employing only
a low-pass ﬁlter fails to describe the modulation detection
data for a narrow-band noise carrier ͑cf. Fleischer, 1982a,
1983͒. Furthermore, such a model fails to describe the mask-
ing data using the tone-complex modulation masker. Hence,
the model proposed here considerably expands the class of
experiments that can be modeled correctly while still main-
taining some of the properties and predictions of the model
proposed by Viemeister ͑1979͒.
C. Intrinsic ﬂuctuations of the noise carrier
In the past, only a few studies have attempted to involve
the inherent statistical properties of the noise carriers in ex-
plaining and modeling TMTFs ͑e.g., Zwicker, 1953; Mai-
wald, 1967a, b; Fleischer, 1981, 1982b͒. For example, Fleis-
cher ͑1981, 1982a, b͒ investigated TMTFs using narrow-
band noise as the carrier. He developed a model for
describing the interaction between inherent ﬂuctuations
within a noise carrier and the detectability of added modula-
tion. The ‘‘modulation spectrum’’ was weighted by a certain
factor which essentially represented a low-pass characteris-
tic. For modulation frequencies lower than half the band-
width of the noise carrier, this model yields good agreement
with experimental results for modulation detection and
modulation difference limens ͑Fleischer, 1981, 1982a,
1982b͒. For modulation frequencies larger than half the
bandwidth of the noise carrier, this model would always pre-
dict a low-pass characteristic in the threshold function with-
out regard to the applied carrier bandwidth—in the same way
as shown in Sec. IV for the Viemeister model. Therefore, to
account for the data, Fleischer extended the model by assum-
ing ‘‘cross-talk’’ between the inherent ﬂuctuations of the
noise and the added modulation. He postulated a decay at a
rate of 16 dB per decade of the modulation frequency to
account for the high-pass characteristic in the data. In order
to ﬁnd a description for the inherent modulation of the noise,
Fleischer ͑1981͒ regarded narrow-band noise with a band-
width ⌬f as a pure tone which was amplitude modulated by
a continuum of equal-amplitude modulation frequencies be-
tween zero and half the bandwidth of the noise. But this
assumption is not correct. It would imply that the modulation
spectrum of noise has a ﬂat rather than a triangular shape, as
shown by Lawson and Uhlenbeck ͑1950͒ ͑see the Appendix͒.
Even though the exact shape of the modulation spectrum
assumed by Fleischer ͑1981͒ was not correct and the subse-
quent explanation of the data was based on a different con-
cept than the one described here, Fleischer’s concept of
cross-talk between inherent envelope ﬂuctuations of the car-
rier noise and the test modulation is compatible with the
bandpass analysis proposed here. Within the modulation ﬁl-
terbank model, the low-pass characteristic of the threshold
function for conditions with fmod
Ͻ⌬f/2 does not result from
a speciﬁc weighing function used to model the ‘‘sluggish-
ness’’ of the auditory system. Instead, it is a consequence of
the intrinsic envelope ﬂuctuations of noise bands and their
spectral distribution on the one hand, and of the logarithmic
scaling of the postulated modulation ﬁlters on the other hand.
A critical test for this interpretation would be to obtain
TMTFs for noise carriers with an envelope spectrum differ-
ent from that of Gaussian noise, for example, low-noise
noise ͑Hartmann and Pumplin, 1988; Kohlrausch et al.,
1997͒.
The current model can also account for the data using
very narrow-band stimuli as the carrier, describing a high-
pass or bandpass characteristic in the threshold function.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
͑1͒ The experiments on modulation detection and modu-
lation masking described here agree well with experiments
from the literature. They provide a strong indication for an
analysis of envelopes in terms of a separation into different
modulation frequencies.
͑2͒ The model of the effective signal processing in the
auditory system proposed here is capable of quantitatively
modeling most aspects of the experiments described. It em-
ploys a modulation ﬁlterbank for envelope analysis that ex-
hibits a constant absolute bandwidth for low frequencies and
a constant relative bandwidth for modulation frequencies
above 10 Hz. Within the context of this model, the low-pass
characteristic of the broadband TMTF is due to the inherent
ﬂuctuations of the carrier and constant relative bandwidth of
the modulation ﬁlters, and not to a low-pass characteristic
within the auditory system per se.
͑3͒ While the predictions of the model proposed here
agree with some predictions of the modulation low-pass
model by Viemeister ͑1979͒ and an earlier version of the
2903 2903
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
current model ͑Dau et al., 1996a, b͒, the model also holds for
experiments such as modulation detection for narrow-band
noise carriers, where the modulation low-pass approach
clearly fails.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all our colleagues of the Gra-
duiertenkolleg Psychoakustik at the University of Oldenburg
for fruitful discussions on the content of this paper. We also
thank Brian Moore, Jesko Verhey, Andrew Oxenham, Stefan
Mu
¨nkner, and Ralf Fassel for their comments and sugges-
tions concerning this study and for their critical reading of
earlier versions of this paper. Two anonymous reviewers also
provided very constructive criticism.
APPENDIX: ENVELOPE SPECTRA OF GAUSSIAN
NOISES
The time-averaged power of the envelope is twice the
average power of the waveform. Hence, it is independent of
the noise bandwidth, as long as the total waveform power is
ﬁxed ͑cf. Hartmann and Pumplin, 1988͒. Therefore, for ex-
ample, two Gaussian waveforms with the same power but
with different bandwidths, have the same envelope power.
An interesting question is related to the spectral distri-
bution of the envelope power. Lawson and Uhlenbeck ͑1950͒
calculated the spectrum of the envelope via Fourier trans-
form of the autocorrelation function of the envelope. Assum-
ing a rectangular shape of the power spectrum of the noise,
they showed that the modulation spectrum NϭN(fmod
), i.e.,
the power spectrum of the ͑linear͒ envelope of the noise, is
given approximately by the formula:
N⌬f,␳
͑ fmod
͒Ϸ␲⌬f␳␦͑ fmod
͒ϩ
␲␳
4⌬f
͑⌬fϪfmod
͒, ͑A1͒
where ⌬f is the noise bandwidth, ␳ is the power spectral
density, and fmod
indicates modulation frequency. Besides
the dc peak represented by the ␦ function, an approximately
triangular continuous spectrum results. In the case of the
squared envelope, the modulation spectrum has exactly a tri-
angular shape besides the dc peak. This corresponds to the
Wiener–Chintchin theorem which states that the Fourier
transform of the squared signal equals the autocorrelation of
the spectrum of the signal.
The following aspects are of particular relevance for
modulation-detection experiments using a narrow-band noise
as carrier: For a constant overall level of a noise band, the
total power of intrinsic noise ﬂuctuations, i.e., the total area
under the triangle, remains constant. What changes is the
spectral region over which the envelope spectrum stretches.
Hence, with increasing noise bandwidth, the modulation
spectrum becomes broader and ﬂatter.
1This modiﬁcation was motivated by physiological studies on adaptation in
auditory nerve ﬁbres where a comparable ratio of onset and steady state
response was found ͑e.g., Smith and Zwislocki, 1975; Westerman and
Smith, 1984͒. It was further assumed that the too strong overshoot at the
output of the adaptation model in its original version ͑see Dau et al., 1996a,
b͒ would have a detrimental effect on psychoacoustical threshold predic-
tions. However, the limitation of the onset response by Mu
¨nkner ͑1993͒
was found to not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the results in the present
study.
2The transfer functions of the resonance ﬁlters can be derived from the
following recursive function: yi
ϭeϪ␲B⌬
•
eϪi2␲f0
⌬
•
yiϪ1
ϩ(1ϪeϪ␲B⌬)
•
xi
, where B is the ﬁlter bandwidth, f0
is the center frequency of the
resonance ﬁlter, and ⌬ is the inverse sample rate. The output yi
at time i
depends on the input xi
at time i and on the last output value yiϪ1
.
3The adaptation loops transform fast envelope ﬂuctuations nearly linearly.
However, in the framework of the present model, without any further non-
linearity at a level where the signal envelope has already been extracted, it
would not be possible to simulate a sufﬁcient amount of masking in con-
ditions with random modulation maskers. Particularly, in such masking
experiments, the scaling of the modulation ﬁlters would not have an effect
and masked thresholds would not depend on signal modulation frequency
which is in contrast with experimental data ͑see also the accompanying
paper by Dau et al., 1997͒. A physiological motivation for the calculation
of the envelope of the modulation ﬁlter output may be given by the ﬁnding
of Langner and Schreiner ͑1988͒ that a much greater percentage of neurons
in the central nucleus of the inferior colliculus of the cat show sensitivity
for modulation rate than for modulation phase, indicating that at this stage
of processing a modulation-rate place coding is performed and modulation
phase information is reduced. Such a coding has already been incorporated
by Hewitt and Meddis ͑1994͒ in a computer model of amplitude-
modulation sensitivity of single units in the IC.
4Because of the relatively broad tuning of the modulation ﬁlters, some en-
ergy of a ͑stationary͒ signal also leaks into the transfer range of the over-
lapping modulation ﬁlters tuned to ‘‘higher’’ modulation frequencies. Thus
the internal representation contains signal information in parallel at the
output of several modulation ﬁlters, whereas in the original model version
͑Dau et al., 1996a, b͒ only the lowest modulation channel ͑low-pass͒ con-
tributed to the decision. Therefore, in the corresponding calibration experi-
ment, a somewhat higher variance of the internal noise at the output of each
modulation ﬁlter is required to satisfy the 1-dB criterion compared to the
variance adjusted with the modulation low-pass approach described in Dau
et al. ͑1996a, b͒.
5The optimal detector realized in the model clearly is an application of the
original concept of the optimal detector developed in signal detection
theory by Green and Swets ͑1966͒, in which—for the case of signal known
exactly—the signal itself ͑and not the signal with noise͒ is used for the
correlation with the received signal. It should be noted, as already men-
tioned in Dau et al. ͑1996a͒, that in actual masking experiments, the signal
is typically not presented in isolation, and that, second, the presence of the
‘‘masker’’ inﬂuences the internal representation of the signal in a nonlinear
way. It appears to be an appropriate strategy to extract the internal repre-
sentation of the ͑normalized͒ template at a level well above threshold—
comparable with the situation at the beginning of an actual experiment—
containing just a small amount of internal and external noise ͑see, for
example, the template from Fig. 6 in the present study͒. It is further noted
that the current modeling approach realizes a decision device acting at the
level of the internal representation of the stimuli. All information about the
signal that is available at this stage of processing, is used in an ‘‘optimal’’
way. That is, information is combined optimally, although, for example,
modulation phase is lost at a certain stage of preprocessing.
Bacon, S. P., and Grantham, D. W. ͑1989͒. ‘‘Modulation masking: Effects
of modulation frequency, depth, and phase,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85,
2575–2580.
Burns, E. M., and Viemeister, N. ͑1981͒. ‘‘Played again SAM: Further
observations on the pitch of amplitude-modulated noise,’’ J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 70, 1655–1660.
Creutzfeldt, O. D., Hellweg, F. C., and Schreiner, C. E. ͑1980͒. ‘‘Thalamo-
cortical transformation of responses to complex auditory stimuli,’’ Exp.
Brain Res. 39, 87–104.
Dau, T. ͑1996͒. ‘‘Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation,’’
Doctoral thesis, University of Oldenburg.
Dau, T., Kollmeier, B., and Kohlrausch, A. ͑1997͒. ‘‘Modeling auditory
processing of amplitude modulation. II. Spectral and temporal integra-
tion,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 102, 2906–2919.
Dau, T., Pu
¨schel, D., and Kohlrausch, A. ͑1996a͒. ‘‘A quantitative model of
the ‘‘effective’’ signal processing in the auditory system: I. Model struc-
ture,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3615–3622.
Dau, T., Pu
¨schel, D., and Kohlrausch, A. ͑1996b͒. ‘‘A quantitative model of
the ‘‘effective’’ signal processing in the auditory system: II. Simulations
and measurements,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3623–3631.
2904 2904
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
Eddins, D. ͑1993͒. ‘‘Amplitude modulation detection of narrow-band noise:
Effects of absolute bandwidth and frequency region,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
93, 470–479.
Fassel, R. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Experimente und Simulationsrechnungen zur Wahrneh-
mung von Amplitudenmodulationen im menschlichen Geho
¨r,’’ Doctoral
thesis, University of Go
¨ttingen.
Fassel, R., and Kohlrausch, A. ͑1995͒. ‘‘Modulation detection as a function
of carrier frequency and level,’’ IPO Annual Progress Report 30, 21–29.
Fassel, R., and Kohlrausch, A. ͑1996͒. ‘‘Sinusoidal amplitude modulation
thresholds as a function of carrier frequency and level,’’ J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 99, 2566.
Fassel, R., and Pu
¨schel, D. ͑1993͒. ‘‘Modulation detection and masking
using deterministic and random maskers,’’ in Contributions to Psychologi-
cal Acoustics, edited by A. Schick ͑Universita
¨tsgesellschaft Oldenburg,
Oldenburg͒, pp. 419–429.
Fassel, R., Kohlrausch, A., and Dau, T. ͑1997͒. ‘‘The inﬂuence of carrier
level and frequency on modulation and beat-detection thresholds for sinu-
soidal carriers,’’ submitted to J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
Fleischer, H. ͑1981͒. ‘‘Amplitudenmodulation von Terzrauschen: Experi-
mente und theoretische Ergebnisse,’’ Acustica 47, 155–163.
Fleischer, H. ͑1982a͒. ‘‘Modulationsschwellen von Schmalbandrauschen,’’
Acustica 51, 154–161.
Fleischer, H. ͑1982b͒. ‘‘Calculating psychoacoustic parameters of amplitude
modulated narrow noise bands,’’ Biol. Cybern. 44, 177–184.
Fleischer, H. ͑1983͒. ‘‘Modulation thresholds of narrow noise bands,’’ Pro-
ceedings of the 11th ICA, Paris 1983, pp. 99–102.
Forrest, T. G., and Green, D. M. ͑1987͒. ‘‘Detection of partially ﬁlled gaps
in noise and the temporal modulation transfer function,’’ J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 82, 1933–1943.
Goldstein, J. L. ͑1967͒. ‘‘Auditory spectral ﬁltering and monaural phase
perception,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 41, 458–479.
Green, D. M. ͑1973͒. ‘‘Temporal acuity as a function of frequency,’’ J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 54, 373–379.
Green, D. M., and Swets, J. A. ͑1966͒. Signal Detection Theory and Psy-
chophysics ͑Wiley, New York͒.
Hartmann, W. M., and Pumplin, J. ͑1988͒. ‘‘Noise power ﬂuctuation and the
masking of sine signals,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83, 2277–2289.
Hewitt, M. J., and Meddis, R. ͑1994͒. ‘‘A computer model of amplitude-
modulation sensitivity of single units in the inferior colliculus,’’ J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 95, 2145–2159.
Holube, I., and Kollmeier, B. ͑1996͒. ‘‘Speech intelligibility prediction in
hearing-impaired listeners based on a psychoacoustically motivated per-
ception model,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 100, 1703–1716.
Houtgast, T. ͑1989͒. ‘‘Frequency selectivity in amplitude-modulation detec-
tion,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85, 1676–1680.
Kohlrausch, A., Fassel, R., van der Heijden, M., Kortekaas, R., van de Par,
S., Oxenham, A., and Pu
¨schel, D. ͑1997͒. ‘‘Detection of tones in low-
noise noise: Further evidence for the role of envelope ﬂuctuations,’’
Acust. Acta Acust. 83, 659–669.
Kollmeier, B., Dau, T., Hansen, M., and Holube, I. ͑1996͒. ‘‘An Auditory-
Model Framework for Psychoacoustics and Speech Perception and its Ap-
plications,’’ Proceedings of the First Forum Acusticum, Antwerpen, pub-
lished in Acust. Acta Acust. 82, Suppl. 1, 89.
Langner, G. ͑1992͒. ‘‘Periodicity coding in the auditory system,’’ Hearing
Res. 60, 115–142.
Langner, G., and Schreiner, C. ͑1988͒. ‘‘Periodicity coding in the inferior
colliculus of the cat. I. Neuronal mechanism,’’ J. Neurophysiol. 60, 1799–
1822.
Lawson, J. L., and Uhlenbeck, G. E. ͑1950͒. Threshold Signals, Volume 24
of Radiation Laboratory Series ͑McGraw-Hill, New York͒.
Levitt, H. ͑1971͒. ‘‘Transformed up–down procedures in psychoacoustics,’’
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 49, 467–477.
Maiwald, D. ͑1967a͒. ‘‘Ein Funktionsschema des Geho
¨rs zur Beschreibung
der Erkennbarkeit kleiner Frequenz- und Amplitudena
¨nderungen,’’ Acus-
tica 18, 81–92.
Maiwald, D. ͑1967b͒. ‘‘Die Berechnung von Modulationsschwellen mit
Hilfe eines Funktionsschemas,’’ Acustica 18, 193–207.
Martens, J. P. ͑1982͒. ‘‘A new theory for multitone masking,’’ J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 72, 397–405.
Moore, B. C. J., and Glasberg, B. R. ͑1986͒. ‘‘The role of frequency selec-
tivity in the perception of loudness, pitch and time,’’ in Frequency Selec-
tivity in Hearing, edited by B. C. J. Moore ͑Academic, London͒, pp.
251–308.
Mu
¨nkner, S. ͑1993͒. ‘‘Modellentwicklung und Messungen zur Wahrneh-
mung nichtstationa
¨rer Signale,’’ Doctoral thesis, University of Go
¨ttingen.
Mu
¨nkner, S., and Pu
¨schel, D. ͑1993͒. ‘‘A psychoacoustical model for the
perception of non-stationary sounds,’’ in Contributions to Psychological
Acoustics, edited by A. Schick ͑Universita
¨tsgesellschaft Oldenburg, Old-
enburg͒, pp. 121–134.
Palmer, A. R. ͑1982͒. ‘‘Encoding of rapid amplitude modulations by
cochlear-nerve ﬁbers in the guinea pig,’’ Arch. Otorhinolaryngol. 236,
197–202.
Patterson, R. D., Nimmo-Smith, I., Holdsworth, J., and Rice, P. ͑1987͒. ‘‘An
efﬁcient auditory ﬁlterbank based on the gammatone function,’’ in Paper
presented at a meeting of the IOC Speech Group on Auditory Modelling at
RSRE, December 14–15.
Pu
¨schel, D. ͑1988͒. ‘‘Prinzipien der zeitlichen Analyse beim Ho
¨ren,’’ Doc-
toral thesis, University of Go
¨ttingen.
Ronken, D. A. ͑1970͒. ‘‘Monaural detection of a phase difference in
clicks,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 47, 1091–1099.
Schreiner, C., and Langner, G. ͑1984͒. ‘‘Representation of periodicity infor-
mation in the inferior colliculus of the cat,’’ Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 10, 395.
Schreiner, C., and Urbas, J. V. ͑1988͒. ‘‘Representation of amplitude modu-
lation in the auditory cortex of the cat. II. Comparison between cortical
ﬁelds,’’ Hearing Res. 32, 49–65.
Sheft, S., and Yost, W. ͑1990͒. ‘‘Temporal integration in amplitude modu-
lation detection,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 88, 796–805.
Smith, R., and Zwislocki, J. ͑1975͒. ‘‘Short-term adaptation and incremental
responses of single auditory-nerve ﬁbers,’’ Biol. Cybern. 17, 169–182.
Strickland, E. A., and Viemeister, N. F. ͑1996͒. ‘‘Cues for discrimination of
envelopes,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3638–3646.
Strickland, E. A., and Viemeister, N. F. ͑1997͒. ‘‘The effects of frequency
region and bandwidth on the temporal modulation transfer function’’ J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 102, 1799–1810.
Strube, H. W. ͑1985͒. ‘‘A computationally efﬁcient basilar-membrane
model,’’ Acustica 58, 207–214.
Viemeister, N. F. ͑1979͒. ‘‘Temporal modulation transfer functions based
upon modulation thresholds,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 66, 1364–1380.
Viemeister, N. F., and Plack, C. J. ͑1993͒. ‘‘Time analysis,’’ in Human
Psychophysics, edited by W. A. Yost, A. N. Popper, and R. R. Fay
͑Springer-Verlag, New York͒, pp. 116–154.
Wier, C., Jesteadt, W., and Green, D. M. ͑1977͒. ‘‘Frequency discrimination
as a function of frequency and sensation level,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 61,
178–184.
Westerman, L., and Smith, R. ͑1984͒. ‘‘Rapid and short-term adaptation in
auditory nerve responses,’’ Hearing Res. 15, 249–260.
Yost, W. A., Sheft, S., and Opie, J. ͑1989͒. ‘‘Modulation interference in
detection and discrimination of amplitude modulation,’’ J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 86, 2138–2147.
Zwicker, E. ͑1952͒. ‘‘Die Grenzen der Ho
¨rbarkeit der Amplitudenmodula-
tion und der Frequenzmodulation eines Tones,’’ Acustica 2, 125–133.
Zwicker, E. ͑1953͒. ‘‘Die Vera
¨nderung der Modulationsschwellen durch
verdeckende To
¨ne und Gera
¨usche,’’ Acustica 3, 274–278.
Zwicker, E. ͑1956͒. ‘‘Die elementaren Grundlagen zur Bestimmung der In-
formationskapazita
¨t des Geho
¨rs,’’ Acustica 6, 365–381.
2905 2905
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 102, No. 5, Pt. 1, November 1997 Dau et al.: Detection and masking with narrow-band carriers
