A quantitative model of the 'effective' signal processing in the
auditory system. I. Model structure
Citation for published version (APA):
Dau, T., Püschel, D., & Kohlrausch, A. G. (1996). A quantitative model of the 'effective' signal processing in the
auditory system. I. Model structure. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 99(6), 3615-3622.
https://doi.org/10.1121/1.414959
DOI:
10.1121/1.414959
Document status and date:
Published: 01/01/1996
Document Version:
Publisher’s PDF, also known as Version of Record (includes final page, issue and volume numbers)
Please check the document version of this publication:
• A submitted manuscript is the version of the article upon submission and before peer-review. There can be
important differences between the submitted version and the official published version of record. People
interested in the research are advised to contact the author for the final version of the publication, or visit the
DOI to the publisher's website.
• The final author version and the galley proof are versions of the publication after peer review.
• The final published version features the final layout of the paper including the volume, issue and page
numbers.
Link to publication
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
• Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research.
• You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit-making activity or commercial gain
• You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal.
If the publication is distributed under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license above, please
follow below link for the End User Agreement:
www.tue.nl/taverne
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at:
openaccess@tue.nl
providing details and we will investigate your claim.
Download date: 21. Jun. 2026
A quantitative model of the ‘‘effective’’ signal processing
in the auditory system. I. Model structure
Torsten Daua) and Dirk Pu
¨schelb)
Drittes Physikalisches Institut, Universtita
¨t Go
¨ttingen, Bu
¨rgerstr. 42-44, 37073 Go
¨ttingen, Germany
Armin Kohlrauschc)
Institute for Perception Research (IPO), P.O. Box 513, 5600 MB Eindhoven, The Netherlands
͑Received 20 June 1994; revised 24 January 1996; accepted 18 February 1996͒
This paper describes a quantitative model for signal processing in the auditory system. The model
combines a series of preprocessing stages with an optimal detector as the decision device. The
present paper gives a description of the various preprocessing stages and of the implementation of
the optimal detector. The output of the preprocessing stages is a time-varying activity pattern to
which ‘‘internal noise’’ is added. In the decision process, a stored temporal representation of the
signal to be detected ͑template͒ is compared with the actual activity pattern. The comparison
amounts to calculating the correlation between the two temporal patterns and is comparable to a
‘‘matched ﬁltering’’ process. The detector itself derives the template at the beginning of each
simulated threshold measurement from a suprathreshold value of the stimulus. The model allows
one to estimate thresholds with the same signals and psychophysical procedures as those used in
actual experiments. In the accompanying paper ͓Dau et al., J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3623–3631
͑1996͔͒ data obtained for human observers are compared with the optimal-detector model for
various masking conditions. © 1996 Acoustical Society of America.
PACS numbers: 43.66.Ba, 43.66.Dc
INTRODUCTION
This is the ﬁrst of two papers in which we describe a
quantitative model for signal processing in the auditory sys-
tem. This model combines several stages which simulate as-
pects of transformation in the auditory periphery with an
optimal detector as the decision device.
The model described in this paper is applicable to mask-
ing conditions with stochastic as well as with deterministic
maskers, independent of the temporal relation between
masker and signal. In comparison to other models that allow
the computation of masked thresholds, the present model dif-
fers in two relevant aspects. As part of the peripheral pro-
cessing part, it contains a stage that simulates aspects of
temporal adaptation. This part is responsible for the ability of
the model to predict the decay of thresholds in forward-
masking conditions ͑Pu
¨schel, 1988͒. The decision stage is
realized as an optimal detection process which is based on
the signal detection theory ͑Green and Swets, 1966͒. This
choice for the decision stage allows the validity of the pre-
processing stages to be assessed. If, under a speciﬁc condi-
tion, the model is systematically less sensitive than real ob-
servers, we can conclude that too much information is lost in
the preprocessing parts of the model. Thus discrepancies of
this kind are clear hints as to where the model has to be
changed, and examples for this will be presented in the ac-
companying paper.
One main property of the model is that it deals with
actual time signals and that threshold values are derived us-
ing an adaptive tracking procedure in a simulated three-
interval forced-choice procedure. Therefore, the same stimuli
as in psychoacoustic experiments can be used in the simula-
tions, and the results of the optimal processor model can be
directly compared with the thresholds obtained by human
observers.
In this ﬁrst paper we will describe the speciﬁc properties
of the various model stages. In this description, we concen-
trate on aspects in which the present model differs from other
models. A comparison of model predictions with the perfor-
mance of human observers is provided in the accompanying
paper.
I. DESCRIPTION OF THE MODEL
A. General aspects
The model described in this paper consists of two major
parts, which will be described in detail in the two following
Secs. I B and I C. In the ﬁrst part of the model ͑which in-
cludes the blocks labeled ‘‘preprocessing,’’ ‘‘adaption,’’ and
‘‘internal noise’’ in Fig. 1͒, several stages of the auditory
periphery are simulated. Through the transformations occur-
ring in these stages, certain details in the incoming sounds
are lost, like, e.g., the temporal ﬁne structure in high-
frequency auditory channels. The internal representation of
auditory stimuli at the output of this part is then analyzed by
an optimal detection device reﬂecting the second part of the
model. The detector is designed to make optimal use of dif-
ferences between internal representations of different stimuli.
It is well known that the processing of sound in the
auditory system is accompanied by a loss of information,
a͒Current address: Carl-von-Ossietzky Universita
¨t Oldenburg, Graduierten-
kolleg Psychoakustik, Postfach 2503, D-26129 Oldenburg, Germany.
b͒Current address: Akustikbu
¨ro Go
¨ttingen, Kornmarkt 2, D-37073 Go
¨ttin-
gen, Germany.
c͒All correspondence should be sent to Armin Kohlrausch at this address.
E-mail: kohlraus@natlab.research.philips.com
3615 3615
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99 (6), June 1996 0001-4966/96/99(6)/3615/8/$6.00 © 1996 Acoustical Society of America
because not every change in a stimulus can be detected. In
intensity discrimination tasks using long-duration stimuli, the
just detectable increment is approximately proportional to
the pedestal level, in accordance with Weber’s law. This im-
plies that the auditory system is a nonlinear system, because
otherwise the superposition principle holds and the level of a
deterministic signal was of no relevance for the detection of
a superimposed signal.
In fact, Weber’s law has often been related to a logarith-
mic transformation of the linear pressure amplitude in the
auditory system. Although this relation is not entirely con-
sistent with some intensity discrimination data at high fre-
quencies ͑Florentine et al., 1987; Long and Cullen, 1985;
Carlyon and Moore, 1984 and 1986; Oxenham and Moore,
1995͒, it does provide a ﬁrst-order approximation. But be-
cause the logarithm is strictly monotonic, this transformation
alone is not equivalent to a loss of information. To cause a
loss of information, a limitation of the resolution has to fol-
low the nonlinearity. In the present model, such a limitation
is achieved by adding an internal noise with a level-
independent variance after the nonlinear transformation.
To simulate the ability of a human observer to discrimi-
nate between two auditory stimuli, an optimal detection pro-
cess is attached to the model after the preprocessing stages.
In this stage, differences between the internal representations
of the two stimuli in question are analyzed. If the mean in-
ternal representations of the two stimuli differ by an amount
that is large compared to the variance of the internal noise,
the difference will be detectable with a probability close to
unity.
In this way—if identical signals are presented by the
same type of adaptive procedure as in corresponding
measurements—the model could be considered as ‘‘imitat-
ing’’ a human observer. Hypotheses and models concerning
‘‘signal processing’’ in the auditory system can be tested by
comparing simulated and measured data. The optimality of
the detection process refers to the best possible theoretical
performance in detecting signals under speciﬁc conditions.
The mathematical framework for the optimal detection pro-
cess was provided by the signal detection theory of Green
and Swets ͑1966͒. In the following two sections, the succes-
sive stages of preprocessing of auditory stimuli and the gen-
eral structure of the decision device are speciﬁed in detail.
B. Stages of peripheral processing
1. General structure
Because detection performance of the model depends on
the preprocessing of the signals, it is necessary to describe
the different processing stages in the auditory system and
their realization in the model more precisely.
Sinusoids of different frequencies produce peak re-
sponses at different places along the basilar membrane ͑von
Be
´ke
´sy, 1949͒. This frequency-place transformation implies
that each place has a bandpass-ﬁlter characteristic, which
was simulated by a linear basilar-membrane model
͑Schroeder, 1973; Strube, 1985͒. This model is realized as a
wave-digital ﬁlter and computes the ﬁltered signals in 120
output segments. Only the channel tuned to the signal fre-
quency was further examined. As long as broadband noise
maskers are used, the use of off-frequency information is not
advantageous for the subjects.
The signal at the output of the speciﬁc basilar-membrane
segment was half-wave rectiﬁed and low-pass ﬁltered at 1
kHz. This stage roughly simulates the transformation of the
mechanical oscillations of the basilar membrane into recep-
tor potentials in the inner hair cells. The low-pass ﬁltering
essentially preserves the envelope of the signal for high car-
rier frequencies. Effects of adaptation were simulated by
feedback loops ͑Pu
¨schel, 1988; Kohlrausch et al., 1992͒.
This stage compresses stationary signals almost logarithmi-
cally whereas fast ﬂuctuations of the input are transformed
more linearly. These feedback loops were investigated to ex-
plain temporal masking effects and they will be described
more precisely in the following subsection. In the stage fol-
lowing the feedback loops, the signal was low-pass ﬁltered at
FIG. 1. Block diagram of the model. The signals are preprocessed ͑basilar-membrane ﬁltering, half-wave rectiﬁcation, low-pass ﬁltering͒, adapted, low-pass
ﬁltered with ␶ϭ20 ms and ﬁnally added to internal noise; this processing transforms the signals into their internal representations. The difference between the
representation of the masker plus current test signal R(MTc) and the representation of the masker alone R(M) is correlated with the normalized representation
of the template. The correlation is compared with an appropriate decision criterion.
3616 3616
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
8 Hz, corresponding to a time constant of 20 ms. This value
was suggested by the outcome of simulations described in
the accompanying paper ͑Dau et al., 1996͒.
2. Nonlinear adaptation
Since the nonlinear adaptation model of Pu
¨schel ͑1988͒
combined with the optimal detector process has an important
inﬂuence on the results, this processing stage will be dis-
cussed in detail. The model tries to incorporate the adaptive
properties of the auditory periphery ͑Kohlrausch and Pu
¨s-
chel, 1988; Kohlrausch et al., 1992͒. The adaptation stage in
the present model consists of a chain of ﬁve feedback loops
in series with different time constants, as shown in Fig. 2.
Within each single element, the low-pass ﬁltered output is
fed back to form the denominator of the dividing element.
The divisor is the momentary charging state of the low-pass
ﬁlter, determining the attenuation applied to the input. The
time constants are ranged between 5 and 500 ms.1
This model has the following properties: After the onset
of stationary signals the low-pass ﬁlters are charged accord-
ing to their time constants. Because the charging state of the
low-pass ﬁlter enters as divisor, a greater charging causes a
greater attenuation of the input signal. For stationary signals
an input value I produces a value of O ϭ ͱI at the output of
the ﬁrst feedback loop ͑derived from the stationary condition
I/OϭO͒. For a chain of n loops we obtain an output of O
ϭ 2nͱI. For nϭ5 this approaches a logarithmic transform.
The range of derived output values for stationary inputs
with levels between 0 and 100 dB was linearly mapped to the
range of 0 to 100 model units ͑MU͒. For a perfect log trans-
formation, a change of 1 MU would correspond to a 1-dB
change at the input, irrespective of the input level. With ﬁve
feedback loops we obtain an input–output characteristic, i.e.,
a transformation of the input signal level ͑in dB SPL͒ into
model units ͑MU͒, as shown in Fig. 3. There is a small
deviation from a straight line which would represent a loga-
rithm transform on this scale. In the case of an input signal at
a low level a certain increment of the input level leads to a
somewhat smaller increment at the output than in the case of
an input signal at a high level. Since we assume a constant
sensitivity in terms of output values ͑MU͒, this slight devia-
tion from a logarithmic transform predicts a smaller just-
noticeable change in level at high input levels compared with
low input levels.
Input variations that are rapid compared with the time
constants of the low-pass ﬁlters are transformed linearly. If
theses changes are slow enough to be followed by the charg-
ing state of the capacitor, the attenuation gain is also
changed. Thus each element combines a static compressive
nonlinearity with a higher sensitivity for fast temporal varia-
tions.
When a signal is turned off the charge of the capacitor,
and therefore the attenuation applied to the input, decreases
in each stage according to its time constant. Thus the time
constants determine how fast the system returns to its state of
rest. The charge of each low-pass element decays exponen-
tially, which implies a linear decay on a dB scale. By com-
bining several linear decays with different slopes, we get a
piecewise approximation to the well known forward-
masking curve ͑Hanna et al., 1982; Zwicker, 1984͒.
In this way a given signal can reduce the response to a
signal presented subsequently. This makes it possible to
simulate the nonlinear dependence of forward masked
threshold functions on masker level and masker duration.
With a short masker the stages with the long time constants
cannot be fully charged and therefore only the decay due to
the fast stages inﬂuences the forward-masked thresholds ͑cf.
Kohlrausch and Fassel, 1996͒.
To establish an absolute threshold for an auditory signal,
the minimal value at the input of the adaptation stage is
limited by a constant value. This can be interpreted as simu-
lating ‘‘physiological noise’’ ͑e.g., Soderquist and Lindsey,
1972͒ that is added before the logarithmic transformation. If
the current output of the basilar-membrane-ﬁltered signal is
smaller than the threshold it is replaced by the threshold
value. In simultaneous masking situations this scaling is of
little importance. When simulating mainly at absolute thresh-
olds a stochastic noise instead of our constant threshold
value should be used at this point in the model.
The calibration of the model is based on the 1-dB crite-
rion in intensity discrimination tasks. In the ﬁrst step of ad-
justing the model parameters, this value of a just-noticeable
FIG. 2. Adaptation model with feedback loops ͑Pu
¨schel, 1988͒. The model
consists of a chain of ﬁve feedback loops in series with different time
constants ␶
i
. Within each single element, the low-pass ﬁltered output is fed
back to form the denominator of the dividing element. The divisor is the
momentary charging state of the low-pass ﬁlter, determining the attenuation
applied to the input. In the original version the time constants were linearly
distributed between 5 and 500 ms.
FIG. 3. Transformation of the input level ͑dB SPL͒ into the output level
͑model units MU͒ for the adaptation model containing ﬁve feedback loops.
3617 3617
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
change in level of 1 dB was used to determine the variance
of the internal noise. A long-duration signal with a ﬁxed
frequency and a level of 60 dB SPL was presented as the
signal. The variance of the internal noise was adjusted so that
the adaptive procedure led to an increment threshold of ap-
proximately 1 dB. This variance of the internal noise was
kept constant for all model simulations presented in the ac-
companying paper. Because of the almost logarithmic com-
pression of signal amplitude in the model ͑cf. Fig. 3͒ the
1-dB criterion is also approximately satisﬁed over the whole
input level range. The actual values for the just-noticeable
change in level for input levels of 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 dB
are 1.44, 1.13, 0.95, 0.82, and 0.80 dB, respectively.
C. Structure of the decision device
In many psychoacoustical tests the observer’s task is to
detect just-noticeable differences in a sound rather than the
mere presence of a signal. At the beginning of a forced-
choice masking experiment, for example, the signal is usu-
ally presented at a highly detectable level. This gives the
subject a clear idea of ‘‘what to listen for.’’ We assume that
the subject is able to get an ‘‘image’’ of the signal by com-
paring the suprathreshold signal in the masker with the
masker alone. We assume, therefore, that the subject has
access to the internal representations of the suprathreshold
signal and the masker alone and that, in the run of an experi-
ment, the subject uses these representations in deciding
whether or not the signal was presented in a given interval.
Within the model, to get a representation of the signal,
or of a change in a stimulus that is to be detected, the differ-
ence between the internal representation of the masker plus
suprathreshold signal and the internal representation of the
masker alone is considered. In Fig. 1 these representations
are denoted by R(MT) and R(M), respectively. The differ-
ence is normalized to unity energy; this normalized signal is
termed the template. It is important to note that the template
is not derived directly from the internal representation of the
signal alone, but from its representation against the masker
background. This distinction is relevant for two reasons:
First of all, the approach corresponds to the situation in an
actual masking experiment, where the signal is typically not
presented in isolation. Secondly, due to the nonlinear pro-
cessing, the presence of the masker inﬂuences the internal
representation of the signal in a nonlinear way.2
A visual example of how the template is derived from
internal representations of a suprathreshold signal and a
masker alone is shown in Fig. 7, which will be described in
detail in Sec. I D. The top panel shows the temporal course
of the internal representation of a masker that lasts from 100
to 300 ms. The middle panel shows the representation of the
masker plus the supra-threshold signal, which is a short pulse
occurring at 200 ms. The bottom panel shows the template,
derived by subtracting the signals from the top and the
middle panel and normalizing the result. The template was
derived for the frequency channel that was tuned to the sig-
nal frequency. As long as broadband noise maskers are used,
the use of off-frequency information is not advantageous in
detecting the signal. The template can, however, without any
modiﬁcation be equally well derived from more than one
peripheral channel. Such a multichannel template allows for
off-frequency listening and spectral integration of signal en-
ergy across more than one critical band.
For the detection process, the model works on the dif-
ference between the internal representation of masker alone
R(M) and of the current stimulus. If the test signal is within
the current stimulus, given then by R(MTc), the difference
signal [R(MTc)ϪR(M)] for deterministic stimuli contains
only the change introduced by the signal, embedded in inter-
nal noise. If stochastic stimuli are applied, the difference
signal is affected by the statistical properties of the stimuli in
addition to the internal noise. As part of the detection pro-
cess, the model computes the correlation between the tem-
plate and the difference signal.3
As it is shown in the Appendix, the correlation between
the expected signal ͑template͒ and the signal actually re-
ceived is a monotonic function of the likelihood ratio. It is
known from signal detection theory ͑Green and Swets,
1966͒, that each decision rule that is based on the likelihood
ratio, or another quantity which is monotonically related to
the likelihood ratio, optimizes the decision maker’s goal ͑for
example the number of correct decisions͒. In this sense the
detection algorithm based on the correlation is a realization
of an ‘‘optimal detector.’’ 4
In the simulations the stimuli were presented in the same
way as in real psychoacoustical measurements ͑cf. Dau
et al., 1996͒. Thresholds were determined with a 3IFC pro-
cedure with adaptive level tracking ͑two-down one-up͒,
which tracks the point on the psychometric function corre-
sponding to 70.7% correct ͑Levitt, 1971͒. In our simulations
the stored reference, i.e., the internal representation of the
masker alone, R(M), was subtracted in each interval so that,
for deterministic signals, there were two intervals containing
internal noise only and one interval containing internal noise
and the signal. Then, in each interval, the correlation with the
template as described above was computed. The simulated
observer selected the largest value as indicating the signal
interval. The decision was regarded as an ‘‘incorrect re-
sponse’’ if that value stemmed from one of the masker alone
intervals ͑see Appendix͒.
Instead of actually adding the Gaussian noise to the in-
ternal representations, the calculations can be performed in a
less time consuming way. If the variance of the internal noise
is adjusted in the way described in the previous section, we
can from the internal representation for a certain signal value
directly compute the probability of being correct with respect
to the actual dЈ within each trial. In a 3IFC procedure, the
signal thresholds of 70.7% correct corresponds to a dЈ value
of about 1.26 ͑see the Appendix and also MacMillan and
Creelman, 1991͒.
If only the mean values of the simulated thresholds are
of interest, it is possible to simplify the procedure even fur-
ther. In this case the model doesn’t behave truely randomly
concerning the computed probability of correct decisions. In-
stead, the stimulus is assumed to be detected if the probabil-
ity of being correct is larger than the expected value of the
simulated measurement procedure ͑for example 70.7% for a
two-down one-up algorithm͒. Otherwise, the stimulus is not
detected. Therefore, we simply iterated the procedure to de-
3618 3618
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
termine the simulated thresholds. In such a simulation the
psychometric function has a stepped shape. As long as de-
terministic signals are applied, the model provides determin-
istic mean thresholds. However, if signals with stochastic
properties like random-noise maskers are used, the model
also shows stochastic behaviour.
D. Example of auditory signal processing in the
model
As an example of auditory preprocessing we will exam-
ine a section of a broadband noise masker with a ﬂat power
spectrum between 20 and 5000 Hz and a duration of 200 ms.
Figures 4 and 5 show the time function and the power spec-
trum, respectively. The masker was ﬁltered using the basilar-
membrane model of Strube ͑1985͒. Only the ﬁlter output
tuned to a signal frequency of 3 kHz was considered. The
logarithmic power spectrum of this ﬁlter output is shown in
Fig. 6. The top panel in Fig. 7 shows the internal represen-
tation which results after half-wave rectiﬁcation, low-pass
ﬁltering at 1 kHz, adaptation by the feedback loops and the
ﬁnal low-pass ﬁlter ͑8 Hz͒. The ordinate is scaled in model
units ͑MU͒. A pronounced overshoot occurs when the
masker is turned on. The system adapts to its steady state
before the masker is switched off. After the masker has been
switched off, an undershoot is ﬁrst observed, after which the
system slowly returns to its state of rest. The middle panel in
Fig. 7 shows the internal representation of the sum of the
masker and a test signal well above threshold, R(MT). The
test signal is a Hanning-windowed 10-ms 3-kHz sinusoid,
which has been added to the masker of Fig. 4 with an onset
delay of 100 ms. The onset of the test signal produces an
overshoot of the internal ‘‘excitation’’ while the system is
still in the process of adapting to the masker. Finally, the
normalized difference between the two representations is
shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 7. It is assumed that the
FIG. 4. Temporal waveform of a 200-ms noise masker.
FIG. 5. Logarithmic power spectrum of the masker of Fig. 4.
FIG. 6. Spectrum of the masker ﬁltered by the basilar-membrane model of
Strube ͑1985͒. Only the output of the ﬁlter tuned to a signal frequency of 3
kHz is plotted.
FIG. 7. Top panel: Internal representation of the masker ͑without internal
noise͒. Middle panel: Internal representation of the masker plus test signal
͑without internal noise͒. The test signal was a Hanning windowed 10-ms
3-kHz sinusoid that was added to the temporal center of the masker wave-
form of Fig. 4. Bottom panel: Normalized difference between the internal
representations of the masker plus test signal and the masker alone. This
difference is called the template.
3619 3619
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
real observer maintains this ‘‘pattern’’—the template—and
compares it with the actual ͑un-normalized͒ difference be-
tween the representation of the masker plus test signal and
the representation of the masker alone ͑see also Sec. I C͒.
II. DISCUSSION
In the previous section, we have described a speciﬁc
implementation of a model to predict masked thresholds.
This model differs in certain respects from other approaches.
The model proposed by Oxenham and Moore ͑1994͒ is
designed to describe thresholds in forward, backward and
combined forward- and backward-masking conditions. Fol-
lowing a concept proposed by Penner ͑1980͒, their data were
modeled by subjecting the amplitude of the stimuli to a
power-law nonlinearity followed by a sliding temporal inte-
grator ͑‘‘window’’͒. They assumed that the threshold corre-
sponds to a ﬁxed signal-to-noise ratio at the output of the
window. Their decision device is based on the largest differ-
ence in output between the interval containing the masker
and signal, and the interval containing only the masker.
Similar to the approach in the present study, such a decision
mechanism requires that the subject retains a dynamic pat-
tern of the internal representation of the masker alone. The
model is able to account for the decay of nonsimultaneous
masking. The temporal windows derived from the data are
also able to predict thresholds in decrement and increment
detection tasks, and to account for the longer-term effects of
masker duration in forward masking. However, it is unclear,
how well the model is able to predict thresholds in simulta-
neous masking and whether it can show differences for sto-
chastic and deterministic maskers.
One difference between their model and the present one
is the decision device. Oxenham and Moore used the output
of the temporal window only at the point where the signal-
to-noise ratio is greatest, so that there is no possibility of
combining information over time. The authors noted, how-
ever, that a decision device based on information across the
duration of the signal may have provided a better ﬁt to some
of their data. In the same vein, Viemeister and Wakeﬁeld
͑1991͒ have suggested that data from duration and intensity
trade-offs may be accounted for by a ‘‘multiple-look’’
theory, which also involves combining information across
time, such as is implemented in the present model.
Other temporal processing models have been proposed
to account for various phenomena involving temporal reso-
lution such as modulation detection ͑Viemeister, 1979͒, gap
detection ͑Forrest and Green, 1987͒ and certain temporal as-
pects of nonsimultaneous masking ͑Moore et al., 1988͒. The
models incorporate predetection bandpass ﬁltering, followed
by a nonlinearity, mostly half-wave rectiﬁcation, followed by
low-pass ﬁltering. Forrest and Green proposed as a decision
device the ratio of the largest to the smallest instantaneous
output of the low-pass ﬁlter. The decision criterion used by
Moore et al. is based on the largest instantaneous signal-to-
noise ratio. Due to their short time constants and the fact the
decision algorithms are based on a single point in time, nei-
ther model can describe temporal integration data.
Viemeister suggested as a decision statistic the ac-
coupled root-mean-squared ͑rms͒ value of the output of the
low-pass ﬁlter calculated over the duration of the observation
interval. The thresholds were deﬁned as the modulation
depth necessary to produce a certain average increment, rela-
tive to no modulation. Such a process also does not account
for describing longer term integration data. Conversely, it is
known that energy-based integration models, designed to ac-
count for longer term temporal integration ͑e.g., Green,
1960; Green and Swets, 1966͒, cannot account for temporal
resolution data. Also, due to their long time constants such
models are not able to predict differences in signal thresholds
between running and frozen noise.
The model presented in this study has been initially de-
signed to describe temporal aspects of masking. There is no
principal restriction in its application with regard to duration,
spectral composition and the statistical properties of the
masker.
Across-channel processing, as is probably used in co-
modulation masking release ͑CMR͒ and in binaural condi-
tions, is not accounted for. This may be possible with an
additional stage which calculates the correlation between the
different channels.
As we use a linear basilar membrane ﬁlterbank the cur-
rent model cannot predict nonlinear effects such as the level-
dependent upward spread of masking, two-tone suppression,
and combination tones. However, it can be expected that by
replacing the initial ﬁltering stage with a nonlinear, level-
dependent basilar-membrane model these effects can be in-
corporated in a future version of this model.
III. SUMMARY
In this paper we have described a model that simulates
the detection characteristics of the human auditory system.
The model consists of several, partly nonlinear processing
stages and an optimal detector as decision device. The idea
of the optimal detector was taken from the signal detection
theory of Green and Swets ͑1966͒. The statistical basis was
provided by the assumption of an internal Gaussian noise
following the nonlinear processing in the periphery of the
auditory system. The nonlinear processing was developed to
describe the main features of nonsimultaneous masking. The
optimal detector makes it possible to check the inﬂuence of
the preprocessing stages on calculated thresholds. The inter-
nal noise sets a limit to the detection of a change in acoustic
stimuli and therefore determines the resolution of the audi-
tory system. If identical signals and the same adaptive algo-
rithm as in corresponding measurements are used, the com-
puter may be regarded as an ‘‘artiﬁcial’’ observer. The
standard deviation of the internal noise is determined in a
basic simulation concerning the detection of a level incre-
ment. The ﬁve time constants of the adaptive nonlinear pro-
cessing are determined in appropriate simulations concerning
forward masking. These will be presented in the accompany-
ing paper, in which some simulations and measurements of
backward, simultaneous and forward masking will be dis-
cussed in detail.
3620 3620
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank all our colleagues of the psy-
choacoustic research groups at the Universities of Go
¨ttingen
and Oldenburg for fruitful discussions on the content of this
paper. We also thank Dr. Brian Moore for his comments and
suggestions concerning this study and Jesko Verhey, Andrew
Oxenham, Martin Hansen, and Andres Sander for their criti-
cal reading of earlier versions of this paper. The two anony-
mous reviewers also provided very constructive criticism.
This study was supported by a grant from the Deutsche For-
schungsgemeinschaft ͑Ko 1033/3-1͒.
APPENDIX
In the statistical analysis it is assumed that, due to the
internal noise, the representation e(t) of a whole temporal
͑acoustical͒ stimulus at the time t␯
is given by the conditional
density P
„
e(t␯
)͉N
…
ϭ:P(e␯
͉N) if noise alone is present. It is
characterized by P
„
e(t␯
)͉S
…
ϭ:P(e␯
͉S) if signal plus noise
are presented.
With the following simplifying assumptions:
͑1͒ P(e␯
͉S) has mean s␯
and variance ␴2
͑2͒ P(e␯
͉N) has mean 0 and the same variance ␴2 the
probability of a noise-alone interval evoking a representation
e␯
at time t␯
is given by
P͑e␯
͉N͒ϭ
1
␴ͱ2␲
eϪ͑e␯͒2/2␴2
. ͑A1͒
Given signal plus noise, the density function for the occur-
rence of the representation e␯
is denoted by
P͑e␯
͉S͒ϭ
1
␴ͱ2␲
eϪ͑e␯Ϫs␯͒2/2␴2
. ͑A2͒
On the assumption that the different samples e␯
are uncorre-
lated with each other, the representation of the whole tem-
poral stimulus is given by the product of the sample densi-
ties, for example,
P͑e͉S͒ϭ⌸␯
P͑e␯
͉S͒. ͑A3͒
Now the likelihood ratio can be computed. It maps a whole
temporal interval onto a positive real number:
l
„
e͑t͒
…
ϵl͑e͒ϭ
P͑e͉S͒
P͑e͉N͒
ϭ⌸␯
͑1/␴ͱ2␲͒eϪ͑e␯Ϫs␯͒2/2␴2
/
⌸␯
͑1/␴ͱ2␲͒eϪ͑e␯͒2/2␴2
. ͑A4͒
If we take the natural logarithm and simplify this we obtain
According to Eq. ͑A5͒, the correlation between the ex-
pected signal s(t) ͑‘‘template’’͒ and the received e(t) is a
monotonic function of the likelihood ratio. According to the
signal detection theory ͑Green and Swets, 1966͒ the correla-
tion is therefore an appropriate quantity for expressing an
‘‘optimal’’ decision criterion.
To be able to compute the probability of correct re-
sponses we need to know the distributions of the likelihoods
or correlations. If we regard the signals as vectors, the cor-
relation is the scalar product of the Gaussian-distributed
event e(t) and the deterministic template s(t), so the corre-
lation must be Gaussian, too. If the template energy is nor-
malized to 1, the distributions P(l͉S) and P(l͉N) have the
same variance ␴2 as the distributions P(e͉S) and P(e͉N).
The mean of a noise interval is 0, the mean of the signal
interval is denoted by d. The probability of being correct in
an mIFC task is given by
Pm
͑correct͒ϭ
͵
Ϫϱ
ϩϱ
␾
ͩxϪ
d
␴
ͪ⌽͑x͒mϪ1 dx, ͑A6͒
with
⌽͑x͒ϭ
͵
Ϫϱ
x
␾͑xЈ͒ dxЈ, ͑A7͒
where ␾(x) denotes the density of the standard normal dis-
tribution.
Therefore, according to Eq. ͑A6͒, the probability of be-
ing correct depends on d, ␴2 and the number m of the ob-
servation intervals.
An alternative way of deriving Pm
͑correct͒ in Eq. ͑A6͒
is by computing the probability of the correlation value as-
sociated with the signal being greater than the maximum of
all mϪ1 correlation values associated with noise alone.
Cramer ͑1946͒ showed that the maximum of the noise
samples has approximately a Gaussian distribution. Since the
difference of two Gaussian ‘‘random variables’’ also has a
Gaussian distribution, the difference between the sample as-
sociated with the signal and the greatest noise sample must
also have a Gaussian distribution. Therefore Eq. ͑A6͒ can be
approximated by a Gaussian integral with a mean ␮*(m) and
a variance ␴*(m)2 ͑tabulated in Green and Dai, 1991͒:
Pm
͑correct͒Ϸ
͵
Ϫϱ
dϪ␮*͑m͒/␴*͑m͒
␾͑x͒dxϭ⌽
ͩdϪ␮*͑m͒
␴*͑m͒
ͪ.
͑A8͒
In our simulations, this integral must be calculated whenever
the value of the actual variable, which is in most cases the
signal level, is changed. According to Press et al. ͑1989͒ a
closely related mathematical integral, the so-called error
function erf(x), is easily computed
erf͑x͒ϭ
2
ͱ␲
͵
0
x
eϪt2
dt. ͑A9͒
1In the original version ͑Pu
¨schel, 1988͒ the time constants were linearly
distributed between 5 and 500 ms. In the current implementation, one of the
larger time constants was replaced by a smaller one. This led to a better
agreement between measured and simulated data in forward masking con-
ditions. The time constants are 5, 50, 129, 253, 500 ms.
2In the model version described in this paper we have, for simplicity, as-
sumed that the template is derived once at a clearly suprathreshold signal
value. An alternative, and probably more realistic, implementation would
allow a recomputation of the template with a decreasing signal level. Such
3621 3621
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
an implementation allows for changes in the detection cue used by a sub-
ject, which we observe in measurements with deterministic stimuli, when
the signal approaches its threshold. The consequences of such a dynamic
variation of the template are currently being investigated.
3Alternatively, the correlation of the template with the individual test stimuli
could be computed without subtracting the representation of the masker
alone. If the difference between the correlation of the template with the
signal interval and that with the masker-alone interval is considered, the
results of both processes are mathematically equivalent. However, it is
important for the detection process that in forming the template, the masker
alone is subtracted from the original suprathreshold signal. For reasons of
parsimony, we have chosen to describe the detection process within the
actual experiment in the same way.
4One might ask, what is gained by ﬁrst deriving a template and comparing it
with the various intervals instead of comparing the intervals directly with
each other. For instance, as one reviewer suggested, why could one not
directly compare the internal representations of the signals from the experi-
mental intervals? The difference between such an approach and the tem-
plate approach lies in the amount of external ͑in the case of a running-noise
masker͒ or internal variability ͑in the case of a frozen-noise masker͒ that
inﬂuences the detection. For the template approach, this amount is concen-
trated on the duration of the signal and, in addition, optimally weighted by
the template. For the other approach, the total variability contained in the
stimulus and the internal noise during the full observation interval inﬂu-
ences the detection. Thus these two approaches differ in their predictions, if
the duration of either the signal or the masker is varied.
Be
´ke
´sy, G. von ͑1949͒. ‘‘On the resonance and decay period at various
points of the cochlear partition,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 21, 245–254.
Carlyon, R. P., and Moore, B. C. J. ͑1984͒. ‘‘Intensity discrimination: A
severe departure from Weber’s law,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 76, 1369–1376.
Carlyon, R. P., and Moore, B. C. J. ͑1986͒. ‘‘Detection of tones in noise and
the ‘severe departure’ from Weber’s law,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 79, 461–
464.
Cramer, H. ͑1946͒. Mathematical Methods of Statistics ͑Princeton U. P.,
Princeton, NJ͒.
Dau, T., Pu
¨schel, D., and Kohlrausch, A. ͑1996͒. ‘‘A quantitative model of
the ‘effective’ signal processing in the auditory system: II. Simulations
and measurements,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3623–3631.
Florentine, M., Buus, S., and Mason, C. R. ͑1987͒. ‘‘Level discrimination as
a function of level for tones from 0.25 to 16 kHz,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
81, 1528–1541.
Forrest, T. G., and Green, D. M. ͑1987͒. ‘‘Detection of partially ﬁlled gaps
in noise and the temporal modulation transfer function,’’ J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 82, 1933–1943.
Green, D. M. ͑1960͒. ‘‘Auditory detection of a noise signal,’’ J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 32, 121–131.
Green, D. M., and Dai, H. ͑1991͒. ‘‘Probability of being correct with 1 of M
orthogonal signals,’’ Percept. Psychophys. 49, 100–102.
Green, D. M., and Swets, J. A. ͑1966͒. Signal Detection Theory and Psy-
chophysics ͑Wiley, New York͒.
Hanna, T. E., Robinson, D. E., Shiffrin, R. M., and Gilkey, R. H. ͑1982͒.
‘‘Forward masking of diotic and dichotic clicks by noise,’’ J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 72, 1171–1177.
Kohlrausch, A., and Fassel, R. ͑1996͒. ‘‘Binaural masking level differences
in nonsimultaneous masking,’’ in Binaural and Spatial Hearing, edited by
R. Gilkey and T. R. Anderson ͑Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale,
NJ, in press͒.
Kohlrausch, A., and Pu
¨schel, D. ͑1988͒. ‘‘Interrelations between a psychoa-
coustical model of temporal effects in hearing and neurophysiological ob-
servations,’’ in Sense Organs, edited by N. Elsner and F. G. Barth
͑Thieme, Stuttgart͒, p. 39.
Kohlrausch, A., Pu
¨schel, D., and Alphei, H. ͑1992͒. ‘‘Temporal resolution
and modulation analysis in models of the auditory system,’’ in The Audi-
tory Processing of Speech, edited by M. E. H. Schouten ͑Mouton de
Gruyter, Berlin, New York͒, pp. 85–98.
Levitt, H. ͑1971͒. ‘‘Transformed up–down procedures in psychoacoustics,’’
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 49, 467–477.
Long, G. R., and Cullen, J. K. ͑1985͒. ‘‘Intensity difference limens at high
frequencies,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 78, 507–513.
Macmillan, N. A., and Creelman, C. D. ͑1991͒. Detection Theory: A User’s
Guide ͑Cambridge U. P., Cambridge͒.
Moore, B. C. J., Glasberg, B. R., Plack, C. J., and Biswas, A. K. ͑1988͒.
‘‘The shape of the ear’s temporal window,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83,
1102–1116.
Oxenham, A. J., and Moore, B. C. J. ͑1994͒. ‘‘Modeling the additivity of
nonsimultaneous masking,’’ Hear. Res. 80, 105–118.
Oxenham, A. J., and Moore, B. C. J. ͑1995͒. ‘‘Overshoot and the ‘severe
departure’ from Weber’s law,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 2442–2453.
Penner, M. J. ͑1980͒. ‘‘The coding of intensity and the interaction of for-
ward and backward masking,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 67, 608–616.
Press, W. H., Flannery, B. P., Teukolsky, S. A., and Vetterling, W. T.
͑1989͒. Numerical Recipes in C ͑Cambridge U.P., Cambridge͒, 2nd ed.
Pu
¨schel, D. ͑1988͒. ‘‘Prinzipien der zeitlichen Analyse beim Ho
¨ren’’ Ph.D.
thesis, University of Go
¨ttingen.
Schroeder, M. R. ͑1973͒. ‘‘An integrable model for the basilar membrane,’’
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 53, 429–434.
Soderquist, D. R., and Lindsay, W. L. ͑1972͒. ‘‘Physiological noise as a
masker of low frequencies: The cardiac cycle,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 52,
1216–1220.
Strube, H. W. ͑1985͒. ‘‘A computationally efﬁcient basilar-membrane
model,’’ Acustica 58, 207–214.
Viemeister, N. F. ͑1979͒. ‘‘Temporal modulation transfer functions based
upon modulation thresholds,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 66, 1364–1380.
Viemeister, N. F., and Wakeﬁeld, G. H. ͑1991͒. ‘‘Temporal integration and
multiple looks,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 90, 858–865.
Zwicker, E. ͑1984͒. ‘‘Dependence of post-masking on masker duration and
its relation to temporal effects in loudness,’’ J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 75,
219–223.
3622 3622
J. Acoust. Soc. Am., Vol. 99, No. 6, June 1996 Dau et al.: Auditory signal processing. I
