Modeling auditory processing
of
amplitude modulation
Torsten Dau
Bibliotheks- und Informationssystem der Universität Oldenburg
1996
Verlag/Druck/ Bibliotheks- und Informationssystem
Vertrieb der Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg
(BIS) - Verlag -
Postfach 2541, 26015 Oldenburg
Tel.: 0441/798 2261, Telefax: 0441/798 4040
e-mail: sip@bis1.uni-oldenburg.de
ISBN 3-8142-0570-7
Modeling auditory processing
of amplitude modulation
Torsten Dau
Preface
A detailed knowledge of the processes involved in hearing is an essential pre-
requisite for numerous medical and technical applications, such as, e.g., diagnosis
and treatment of hearing disorders, construction and fitting of digital hearing
aids, public address systems in theaters and other auditoria, and speech pro-
cessing in telecommunication and man-machine interaction. Although much is
known about the physiology and psychology of hearing as well as the “effective"
signal processing in the auditory system, still many unsolved problems remain
and even more fascinating properties of the human ear still have to be charac-
terized by the scientist. This is one of the primary goals of the interdisciplinary
graduate college “Psychoacoustics" at the University of Oldenburg where physi-
cists, psychologists, computer scientists, and physicians (specialized in audiology)
pursue an interdisciplinary approach towards a better understanding of hearing
and its various applications. Within this graduate college, approximately 25
Ph.D. students perform their respective Ph.D. work and training program in an
interdisciplinary context. The current issue is based on the doctoral dissertation
by Torsten Dau and is one of the most outstanding “outputs" of this graduate
college.
Torsten Dau's work is focussed on the quantitative modeling of the auditory
system's performance in psychoacoustical experiments. Rather than trying to
model each physiological detail of auditory processing, his approach is to focus
on the “effective" signal processing in the auditory system which uses as little
physiological assumptions and physical parameters as necessary, but tries to pre-
dict as many psychoacoustical aspects and effects as possible. While his previous
work has focussed on temporal effects of auditory processing, Torsten Dau's dis-
sertation focuses on the perception and processing of amplitude modulations.
This topic is of particular importance, because most of the natural signals (in-
cluding speech) are characterized by amplitude modulations and, in addition,
physiological data provide evidence of specialized amplitude modulation process-
ing systems in the brain. Thus, an adequate modeling of modulation perception
should be a key to the quantitative understanding of the functioning of our ear.
The current work now presents a new quantitative signal processing model and
validates this model by using "critical" experiments both from the literature and
by using data from own experiments.
The main chapters of the current work (chapters 2-4) are self-consistent pa-
pers that have already been submitted in a modified version to scientific journals.
The first of these main parts (chapter 2) develops the structure of the processing
model by developing a kind of “artificial" listener, i.e., a computer model which
is fed by the same signals as in the psychoacoustical experiments performed with
human listeners and is constructed to predict the responses on a trial-by-trial
basis. The specialty of this model is the modulation filterbank which forms an
essential improvement over previous versions of the model. The current model-
ing approach reflects the close cooperation between the research groups at the
“Drittes Physikalisches Institut" in Göttingen, the IPO in Eindhoven, and the
University of Oldenburg, and is based on many years of experience in psychoa-
coustic research. With this modulation filterbank, several effects of modulation
detection and modulation masking can be explained in a very exact and intrigu-
ing way. In addition, analytical calculations are presented that deal with the
modulation spectra of bandpass-filtered signals. Also, an extensive comparison
is made between own measurements and model predictions and results from the
literature. Thus, a large body of data and several compelling arguments are
collected that favour the model structure developed here.
Chapter 3 extends the model which was originally designed to deal with
narrow-band signals to the important case of broad-band signals and the case
of considering a larger temporal range. The intriguing "trick" used by Torsten
Dau is to simultaneously evaluate several auditory channels with a combined
“optimum" detector so that an equivalence exists between the evaluation of sev-
eral narrow-band signals and a single broad-band signal. Since previous models of
modulationprocessing from the literature assume such a broad-band analysis, this
approach bridges the gap between these previous models and the model developed
here. A similar principle is used for the temporal domain where the temporal
extension of the signal yields a better detectability of amplitude modulations.
This increase in detectability can be described in an intriguing way by appro-
priate choice of the optimum detector. This concept thus yields a mathematical
formulation of the “multiple-look strategy" often referred to in the literature. As
in the previous chapter, Torsten Dau can predict both the own experimental data
and the data from the literature.
The fourth chapter finally deals with the special case of amplitude modulation
of sinusoidal carriers at very high frequencies where the coding of information in
the central nervous system does not allow for a unique temporal representation
of acoustical signals. Because of this effect, previous studies from the literature
could not describe the results of modulation perception experiments in a satis-
factory way. Torsten Dau can now show in a very impressive way that his model
structure is also capable of explaining these experimental data. Although the
coincidence between his predictions and the data is not as “perfect" as in the
previous chapters, the possible causes for these discrepancies are explained in
detail.
Taken together, the current work can be considered an important milestone
in the quantitative description of the effective signal processing in the auditory
system. Based on this modeling approach introduced here, the science of psy-
choacoustics can be put on a quantitative, numerical foundation. Thus, it might
eventually be possible to distinguish between “processing" factors and “psycho-
logical" factors contributing to the hearing process. These “processing" factors
can be incorporated in a “computer ear" which might be the basis for future
applications such as digital hearing aids, speech coders, and speech recognition
systems. Thus, the current work seems to be both of interest to fundamental
scientists (who are seeking to understand the functioning of the highly nonlin-
ear and complex human auditory system) and to applied scientists (who seek to
use auditory principles for the improvement of technical systems in hearing and
speech technology).
I hope that the reader will enjoy reading this work in a similar way as I en-
joyed working with Torsten on his dissertation and that the reader might get
some impression of the truly interdisciplinary spirit of the graduate college in
Oldenburg.
Oldenburg, summer 1996
Birger Kollmeier
Modeling auditory processing
of amplitude modulation
Vom Fachbereich Physik der Universität Oldenburg
zur Erlangung des Grades eines
Doktors der Naturwissenschaften (Dr. rer. nat.)
angenommene Dissertation
Torsten Dau
geb. am 28.03.1965
in Hannover
Erstreferent: Prof. Dr. Dr. Birger Kollmeier
1. Korreferent: Prof. Dr. Volker Mellert
2. Korreferent: Dr. Armin Kohlrausch
Tag der Disputation: 2. Februar 1996
Abstract
In this thesis a new modeling approach is developed which is able to predict human
performance in a variety of experimental conditions related to modulation detection
and modulation masking. Envelope fluctuations are analyzed with a modulation filter-
bank. The parameters of the filterbank were adjusted to allow the model to account for
modulation detection and modulation masking data with narrowband carriers at a high
center frequency. In the range 0-10 Hz, the modulation filters have a constant band-
width of 5 Hz. Between 10 and 1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling with a constant Q-value
of 2 is assumed. This leads to the following predictions: For conditions in which the
modulation frequency (fmod) is smaller than half the bandwidth of the carrier (Δf),
the model predicts an increase in modulation thresholds with increasing modulation
frequency. This prediction agrees with the lowpass characteristic in the temporal mod-
ulation transfer function (TMTF) in the literature. Within the model this lowpass
characteristic is caused by the logarithmic scaling of the modulation filter bandwidth.
In conditions with fmod > Δf
2 , the model can account for the highpass characteris-
tic in the threshold function, reflecting the auditory system's frequency selectivity for
modulation.
In modulation detection conditions with carrier bandwidths larger than a critical
band, the modulation analysis is performed in parallel within each excited peripheral
channel. In the detection stage of the model, the outputs of all modulation filters
from all excited peripheral channels are combined linearly and with optimal weights.
The model accounts for the findings that, (i), the “time constants" associated with the
temporal modulation transfer functions (TMTFs) for bandlimited noise carriers do not
vary with carrier center frequency and that, (ii), the time constants associated with
the TMTF's decrease monotonically with increasing carrier bandwidth. The model also
accounts for data of modulation masking with broadband noise carriers. The predicted
masking pattern produced by a narrowband noise along the modulation frequency scale
is in very good agreement with results from the literature.
To integrate information across time, a “multiple-look" strategy is realized within
the detection stage. This strategy allows the model to account for long time constants
derived from the data on modulation integration without introducing true long-term
integration. Instead, the long “effective" time constants result from the combination of
information from different “looks" via multiple sampling and probability summation.
In modulation detection experiments with deterministic carriers (such as sinusoids),
the limiting factor for detecting modulation within the model is the internal noise that
is added as independent noise to the output of all modulation filters in all peripheral
filters. In addition, the shape of the peripheralfilters plays a major role in stimulus con-
ditions where the detection is based on the “audibility" of the spectral sidebands of the
modulation. The model can account for the observed flat modulation detection thresh-
olds up to a modulation rate of about 100 Hz and also for the frequency-dependent
roll-off in the threshold function observed in the data for a set of carrier frequencies in
the range from 2{9 kHz.
The model might also be used in applications such as psychoacoustical experiments
with hearing-impaired listeners, speech intelligibility and speech quality predictions.
Contents
1 General Introduction 3
2 Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers 7
2.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2 Description of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
2.2.1 Original model of the “effective" signal processing . . . . . 13
2.2.2 Extension of the model for describing modulation perception 15
2.3 Envelope statistics and envelope spectra of Gaussian noises . . . . 20
2.4 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.4.1 Procedure and Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.4.2 Apparatus and stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
2.5 Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.5.1 Measurements and simulationsof modulationdetection and
modulation masking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
2.5.2 Link between modulation detection and intensity discrim-
ination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
2.6 Predictions of Viemeister's model for modulation detection . . . . 40
2.7 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
2.8 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
3 Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection 48
3.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
3.2 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2.1 Procedure and Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.2.2 Apparatus and stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
3.3 Multi-channel model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
3.4.1 Modulation analysis within and beyond one critical band . 55
3.4.2 Effects of bandwidth and frequency region . . . . . . . . . 56
3.4.3 Further experiments and analytical considerations . . . . . 61
3.4.4 Predictions for modulation masking using broadband noise
carriers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
3.4.5 Temporal integration in modulation detection . . . . . . . 71
1
2 CONTENTS
3.5 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
3.5.1 Spectral integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
3.5.2 Temporal integration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
3.5.3 Future extensions of the model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
3.6 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80
4 Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers 81
4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
4.2 Method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
4.2.1 Procedure and Subjects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
4.2.2 Apparatus and stimuli . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
4.3 Experimental results and model predictions . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
4.3.1 Amplitude modulation detection thresholds for a carrier
frequency of 5 kHz . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
4.3.2 Comparison of sideband detection and amplitude modula-
tion detection data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
4.3.3 Simulations on the basis of the modulation filterbank model 89
4.3.4 TMTFs for different carrier frequencies . . . . . . . . . . . 92
4.4 Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
4.5 Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100
5 Summary and conclusion 101
A Contributions from Signal detection theory (SDT) 104
A.1 Formal discussion of the decision problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . 104
A.2 The decision problem in an mIFC task . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 106
A.3 Gaussian assumption and the probability of correct decisions . . . 107
B Transformation of the nonlinear adaptation circuits 110
References 112
Danksagung 121
Lebenslauf 122
Chapter 1
General Introduction
The auditory system provides us with access to a wealth of acoustic informa-
tion, performing a complex transform of the sound energy incident at our ears
into percepts which enable us to orient ourselves and other objects within our
surroundings. A major aim of psychoacoustic research is to establish functional
relationships between the basic physical attributes of sound, such as intensity,
frequency and changes in these characteristics over time, and their associated per-
cepts. Quantitative studies, using tasks designed to measure behavioral thresh-
olds for the detection and discrimination of various stimuli, assist us in this aim.
This study deals particularly with the dimension of time in auditory processing.
With most sounds in our environment, such as speech and music, information
is contained to a large extent in the changes of sound parameters with time,
rather than in the stationary sound segments. We might therefore expect that
the auditory system is able to follow temporal variations to a high degree of
accuracy. Methods of quantifying the temporal resolution of the auditory system
include measuring the ability of listeners to detect a brief temporal gap between
two stimuli, or to detect a sound that is modulated in some way. Compared with
other sensory systems, the auditory system is “fast", in that we are able to hear
temporal changes in the range of a few milliseconds and can hear the perceptual
“roughness" produced by periodically interrupting a broadband noise at a rate
of up to several kilohertz. This ability is several orders of magnitude faster than
in vision, where modulations in intensity greater than 60 Hz go unnoticed.
When discussing temporal variations, it is necessary to distinguish between
the fine structure of the sound, i.e., the variations in instaneous pressure, and
the envelope of the sound, i.e., the slower, overall changes in the amplitude. In
psychoacoustics, temporal resolution normallyrefers to the latter (e.g. Viemeister
and Plack, 1993).
It is commonly assumed that two general sources of temporal resolution lim-
itation in the auditory system can be distinguished: those of “peripheral" and
those of “central" origin. The term peripheral is associated with the first stages
of auditory processing, up to and including the processing in the auditory nerve.
3
4 Chapter 1: General Introduction
These stages include the filtering of the basilar membrane which necessarily in-
fluences temporal resolution: Temporal fluctuations which occur with a higher
rate than the bandwidth of the auditory filter will be attenuated by the transfer
function of the filter. Due to the variation in auditory filter bandwidth with fre-
quency, this limitation to temporal resolution should be frequency dependent. It
will affect low-frequency sounds much more strongly than high-frequency sounds.
Second, the properties of hair cells, synapses, and the refractory period of neu-
rons limit the maximal discharge rate that can be achieved in the auditory nerve.
This limits the rate of envelope fluctuations that can be encoded. This influence
will be similar at all stimulus frequencies.
Central limitations of the temporal resolution may result from the process-
ing of information at higher stages in the auditory pathway. When measuring
thresholds for detecting fluctuations in the amplitude of a sound as a function of
the rate of fluctuation, it is observed that thresholds progressively increase with
increasing modulation rate (e.g., Viemeister, 1979). The system seems to become
less sensitive to amplitude modulation as the rate of modulation increases. Since
the response of the peripheral stages at high frequencies should be too fast to be
the limiting factor, this has led to the idea that there is a process at a higher
level which is “sluggish" in some way (e.g., Moore and Glasberg, 1986). Models
of temporal resolution are especially concerned with this process.
There is a very popular type of model described in the literature, which has
been developed for describing temporal resolution (e.g., Viemeister, 1979). This
model consists of the following stages: (i) bandpass filtering, (ii) a rectifying non-
linearity, (iii) a lowpass filter and (iv) a decision mechanism (for a review, see
Viemeister and Plack, 1993). The bandpass filtering corresponds to peripheral
filtering. The nonlinearity (e.g., half-wave rectification) introduces low-frequency
components corresponding to the envelope of the signal. The next stage of low-
pass filtering (or integration) is intended to simulate the temporal resolution limit
by attenuating rapid changes in the envelope of the signal. The decision mech-
anism is intended to simulate how the subject uses the output of the integrator
to make a discrimination in a specific task. A variety of decision algorithms has
been used for this model: the signal-to-noise ratio at a particular time in the
stimulus (Moore et al., 1988), the overall variance of the output of the integrator
(Viemeister, 1979), or the ratio between the maximum and minimum values of
the output (Forrest and Green, 1987).
The present study describes a model which differs considerably from the above
modeling approaches. The work builds up on many years of modeling work
started about 10 years ago in the psychoacoustic research group at the University
of Göttingen. The model includes as an important part a nonlinear adaptation
stage which simulates adaptive properties of the periphery and enables the model
to account for data of forward masking (Püschel, 1988). Another further stage,
which also differs considerably from the models described above, is the decision
mechanism. It is implemented as an “optimaldetector" which performs some kind
5
of pattern recognition of the whole temporal course of the internal representation
of the stimuli (Dau, 1992; Dau et al., 1995a). This behavior is in contrast to the
detection mechanisms in the Viemeister model, which are based on a particular
point in time, or on a simple averaging process across time.
This thesis is concerned with the extension of the “effective signal process-
ing" of the auditory system to conditions of modulationdetection and modulation
masking. As a substantially new part of signalprocessing, a modulationfilterbank
is introduced to analyze the envelope fluctuations of the stimuli in each periph-
eral auditory filter. The inclusion of a modulation filterbank, which presumably
represents processing at stages higher than the auditory nerve, is motivated by
results from several studies on modulation masking (e.g., Kay and Green, 1973,
1974; Martens, 1982; Bacon and Grantham, 1989; Houtgast, 1989) and recent
data and model predictions from Fassel and Püschel (1993), Münkner (1993a+b)
and Fassel (1994). The authors suggested modulation channels to account for
effects of frequency selectivity in the modulation frequency domain. Apart from
the study of Fassel (1994) who investigates modulation masking with sinusoidal
carriers at high frequencies, broadband noise has generally been used as the car-
rier. This implies a broad excitation along the basilar membrane. The use of
broadband-noise carriers, however, precludes investigation of temporal process-
ing in the different frequency regions.
Chapter 2 of this thesis deals with narrowband carriers at a high center fre-
quency whose bandwidth is chosen to be smaller than the bandwidth of the
excited peripheral filter. Experiments on modulation detection and modulation
masking are described which investigate the hypothesis of modulation channels.
On the basis of these experiments a model based on one peripheral frequency
channel is developed, incorporating a modulation filterbank whose parameters
are adjusted so as to account for the experimental data. Results are discussed
in terms of the statistical properties of the stimuli at the output of the excited
modulation filters. The performance of the modulation filterbank model is com-
pared with results from simulations obtained with a classical model (Viemeister,
1979).
Chapter 3 deals with spectral and temporal integration in amplitude modu-
lation detection. It describes human performance at the transition of stimulus
bandwidths within and beyond a critical bandwidth, and for broadband condi-
tions. A multi-channel model is proposed to analyze the envelope fluctuations
in parallel in each excited peripheral filter. The parameters of the modulation
channels are assumed to be independent of frequency region, and the combination
of information across frequency, i.e., the effect of spectral integration, is realized
with the assumption of “independent" observations at the outputs of the different
peripheral channels. Temporal integration refers to the ability of the auditory
system to combine information over time to enhance the detection or discrim-
ination of stimuli. It is important to distinguish between temporal resolution
(or acuity) and temporal integration (or summation). The distinction between
6 Chapter 1: General Introduction
these two “complementary" phenomena of resolution and integration does not
necessarily mean that there must be two complementary modeling strategies to
account for the data as proposed, for example, by Green (1985). Instead, the
decision mechanism used in the present model (in combination with the prepro-
cessing stages) is intended to allow a description of both the effects of temporal
resolution (with time constants in the range of several milliseconds) and the ef-
fects of integration (with “effective" time constants in the range of hundreds of
milliseconds).
Chapter 4 describes experiments on modulation detection using sinusoids at
different carrier frequencies (in the range from 2{9 kHz). The assumption of in-
dependent observations across frequency made above is valid for random noise
carriers. In such a case, the information about the presence of a signal modula-
tion increases with the number of independent channels. However, the situation
might be more complicated in conditions with deterministic carriers (such as si-
nusoids). Modulation thresholds can no longer be determined by the statistics
of the inherent fluctuations of the stimuli, as in the conditions of the first two
chapters. In the framework of the present model, performance should be solely
limited by the variance of the internal noise, introduced at the end of the pre-
processing stages. The detection of amplitude modulation in the range from
10{800 Hz is measured and compared with simulated thresholds obtained with
the modulation- filterbank model. The tested conditions include the transition
from purely temporal cues, such as roughness and loudness changes (at low mod-
ulation rates), to spectral cues (at high modulation rates), when the sidebands
of the modulated stimuli are resolved by the auditory system.
Chapter 2
Amplitude modulation detection
and masking with narrowband
carriers1
Abstract
This paper presents a quantitative model for describing data from modulation-
detection and modulation-masking experiments, which extends the model of the
“effective" signal processing of the auditory system described in Dau et al. [J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3615{3622 (1996a)]. The new element in the present model
is a modulation filterbank, which exhibits two domains with different scaling. In
the range 0{10 Hz, the modulation filters have a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz. Be-
tween 10 Hz and 1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling with a constant Q-value of 2 was
assumed. To preclude spectral effects in temporal processing, measurements and
corresponding simulations were performed with stochastic narrowband-noise car-
riers at a high center frequency (5 kHz). For conditions in which the modulation
rate (fmod) was smaller than half the bandwidth of the carrier (Δf), the model ac-
counts for the lowpass characteristic in the threshold functions [e.g. Viemeister, J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 66, 1364{1380 (1979)]. In conditions with fmod > Δf
2 , the model
can account for the highpass characteristic in the threshold function. In a further
experiment, a classical masking paradigm for investigating frequency selectiv-
ity was adopted and translated to the modulation-frequency domain. Masked
thresholds for sinusoidal test modulation in the presence of a competing modu-
lation masker were measured and simulated as a function of the test modulation
rate. In all cases, the model describes the experimental data to within a few dB.
It is proposed that the typical low-pass characteristic of the temporal modulation
1Modified version of the paper “Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation: I.
Detection and masking with narrowband carriers", written together with Birger Kollmeier and
Armin Kohlrausch, submitted to J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
7
8 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
transfer function observed with wideband noise carriers is not due to “sluggish-
ness" in the auditory system, but can instead be accounted for by the interaction
between modulation filters and the inherent fluctuations in the carrier.
2.1 Introduction 9
2.1 Introduction
Periodic envelope fluctuations are a common feature of acoustic communication
signals. The temporal features of vowel-like sounds, for example, can be described
by a series of spectral components with a common fundamental frequency. Since
the human cochlea has a limited frequency resolution, the higher frequency com-
ponents are processed together in one frequency channel, that is, they stimulate
the same group of hair cells and therefore are not separated spectrally within
the auditory system. Two adjacent components of a harmonic sound which fall
into the same frequency channel produce a form of amplitude modulation with a
frequency corresponding to their difference frequency, which is equal to the fun-
damental frequency of the harmonic sound. In this way the fundamental can be
encoded within that specific frequency channel, although it is physically absent.
The “disadvantage" of the poor spectral resolution of simultaneously presented
frequencies is thus compensated for by the “advantage" of temporal interaction
between the spectrally unresolved components. Therefore, the temporal features
of vowel-like sounds are in principle comparable to and are coded in a similar
way to those of amplitude-modulated tones. The spectral peaks of the speech
signal - the formants - would be considered as the carrier frequencies of ampli-
tude modulations and the fundamental frequency of the vowel would correspond
to the modulation frequency (Langner, 1992).
Temporal resolution of the auditory system, that is the ability to resolve dy-
namic acoustical cues, is very important for the processing of complex sounds. A
general psychoacoustical approach to describing temporal resolution is to mea-
sure the threshold for detecting changes in the amplitude of a sound as a function
of the rate of the changes. The function which relates threshold to modulation
rate is called the temporal modulation transfer function (TMTF) (Viemeister,
1979). The TMTF might provide important information about the processing of
temporal envelopes. It is often referred to as the time-domain equivalent of the
audiogram, since it shows the “absolute" threshold for an amplitude-modulated
waveform as a function of the modulation frequency. Since the modulation of a
sound modifies its spectrum, wideband noise is often used as a carrier signal in
order to prevent subjects using changes in the overall spectrum as a detection
cue; modulation of white noise does not change its long-term spectrum. The sub-
ject's sensitivity for detecting sinusoidal amplitude modulation of a broadband
noise carrier is high for low modulation rates and decreases at high modulation
rates. It is therefore often argued in the literature that the auditory system is too
“sluggish" to follow fast temporal envelope fluctuations of sound. Since this sen-
sitivity to modulation resembles the transfer function of a simple lowpass filter,
the attenuation characteristic is often interpreted as the lowpass characteristic of
the auditory system. This view is reflected in the structure of a popular model
for describing the TMTF (Viemeister, 1979).
Measurements of the TMTF were initially motivated by the idea that tem-
10 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
poral resolution could be modeled using a linear systems approach (Viemeister,
1979). In a linear system the response to any input stimulus can be predicted by
summing the responses to the individual sinusoidal components of that stimulus.
A time constant is often derived from the modulation detection data - as the con-
jugate Fourier variable of the TMTF's cut-off frequency - to obtain an estimate
of temporal acuity.
It is often argued that the auditory filters play a role in limiting temporal
resolution (e.g., Moore and Glasberg, 1986), especially at low frequencies (below
1 kHz) where the bandwidths of the auditory filters are relatively narrow, leading
to longer impulse responses (“ringing" of the filters). However, the response of
auditory filters at high frequencies is too fast to be a limiting factor in most
tasks of temporal resolution. Thus there must be a process at a level of the
auditory system higher than the auditory nerve which limits temporal resolution
and causes the “sluggishness" in following fast modulations of the sound envelope.
Results from several studies concerning modulation masking, however, are
not consistent with the idea of only one broad filter, reflected in the TMTF.
Modulation masking provides insight into how the auditory system processes
temporal envelopes in the presence of another competing, temporally fluctuating
background sound. Houtgast (1989) designed experiments to estimate the degree
of frequency selectivity in the perception of simultaneously presented amplitude
modulations, using broadband noise as a carrier. He adopted the classical mask-
ing paradigm for investigating frequency selectivity: the subject's task was to
detect a test modulation in the presence of a masker modulation, as a function
of the frequency difference between the two modulations rates. Houtgast found
some correspondence with classical data on frequency selectivity in the audio-
frequency domain. Using narrow bands of noise as the masker modulation, the
modulation detection threshold function showed a peak at the masker modulation
frequency. This indicates that masking is most effective when the test modulation
frequency falls within the masker-modulation band. In the same vein, Bacon and
Grantham (1989) found peaked masking patterns using sinusoidal masker mod-
ulation instead of a noise-band. Fassel (1994) found similar masking patterns
using sinusoids at high frequencies as carriers and sinusoidal masker modulation.
For spectral tone-on-tone masking, effects of frequency selectivity are well es-
tablished and associated with the existence of independent frequency channels
(critical bands). When translated to the modulation frequency domain, the data
of Houtgast, and Bacon and Grantham suggest the existence of modulation fre-
quency specific channels at a higher level in the auditory pathway. Yost et al.
(1989) also suggested amplitude modulation channels to explain their modulation
detection interference (MDI) data and to account for the formation of auditory
“objects" based upon common modulation. Martens (1982) had already sug-
gested that the auditory system realizes some kind of short-term spectral analysis
of the temporal waveform of the signal's envelope.
Modulation-frequency specificity has also been observed in different physio-
2.1 Introduction 11
logical studies of neural responses to amplitude modulated tones (Creutzfeldt et
al., 1980, Langner and Schreiner, 1988; Schreiner and Urbas, 1988). Langner
(1992) summarized current knowledge about the representation and processing
of periodic signals, from the cochlea to the cortex in mammals. Langner and
Schreiner (1988) stated that the auditory system contains several levels of sys-
tematic topographical organization with respect to the response characteristics
that convey temporal modulation aspects of the input signal. They found that
these different levels of organization range from a general trend of changes in
the temporal resolution along the ascending auditory axis (with a deterioration
of resolution towards higher stations) to a highly systematically organized map
of best modulation frequencies (BMF) within the inferior colliculus of the cat.
Langner and Schreiner (1988) concluded that temporal aspects of a stimulus,
such as envelope variations, represent a further major organizational principle of
the auditory system, in addition to the well-established spectral (tonotopic) and
binaural organization.
Of course, it is very difficult to establish functional connections between mor-
phological structures and perception (cf. Viemeister and Plack, 1993; Schreiner
and Langner, 1988; Fastl, 1990), and, furthermore, it is problematic to extrap-
olate from one species to another. In this sense, psychophysics may be the only
presently available way to explore what mechanisms are needed, because it mea-
sures the whole nervous system in normal operation, and is not just concerned
with specific neural activity, but with complex perception (Kay, 1982). On the
other hand there is a boundless variety of mechanisms that could be postulated
on the basis of psychoacoustical experiments. Given these difficulties, it would
seem preferable to keep modeling within physiologically realistic limits.
The present psychoacoustical study further analyzes the processing of ampli-
tude modulation in the auditory system. The goal is to gather more information
about modulation frequency selectivity and to set up corresponding simulations
with an extended version of a model of the "effective" signal processing in the
auditory system, which was initially developed to describe masking effects for
simultaneous and nonsimultaneous masking conditions and which is extensively
described in Dau (1992) and Dau et al. (1995a,b). As already pointed out, in
most classical studies about temporal processing a broadband noise carrier has
been applied to determine the TMTF. This has the advantage that, in general,
no spectral cues should be available to the subject, because the long-term spec-
trum of sinusoidally amplitude modulated noise (SAM noise) is flat and invariant
with changes in modulation frequency. It is assumed that in general short-term
spectral cues are not being used by the subject (Viemeister, 1979; Burns and
Viemeister, 1981). On the other hand, as a great disadvantage, the use of broad-
band noise carriers does not allow direct information about spectral effects in
temporal processing. Broadband noise excites a wide region of the basilar mem-
brane, leaving unanswered the question of what spectral region or regions are
being used to detect the modulation.
12 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
Therefore measurements and corresponding simulations with stochastic nar-
rowband noises as the carrier at a high center frequency were performed, as was
done earlier by Fleischer (1982). At high center frequencies the bandwidth of the
auditory filters is relatively large so that there is a larger frequency range over
which the sidebands resulting from the modulation are not resolved. Rather the
modulation is perceived as a temporal attribute like fluctuations in loudness (for
low modulation rates) or as roughness (for higher modulation rates). The band-
width of the modulated signal is chosen in order to be smaller than the bandwidth
of the stimulated peripheral filter. This implies that all spectral components are
processed together and that temporal effects are dominant over spectral effects.
2.2 Description of the model 13
2.2 Description of the model
2.2.1 Original model of the “effective" signal processing
In Dau (1992), Dau and Püschel (1993) and Dau et al. (1995a,b) a model was
proposed to describe the “effective" signalprocessing in the auditory system. This
model allows the prediction of masked thresholds in a variety of simultaneous
and non-simultaneous conditions. The model was initially designed to describe
temporal aspects of masking. There is no restriction as to the duration, spectral
composition and statistical properties of the masker and the signal.
The model combines several stages of preprocessing with a decision device
that has the properties of an optimal detector. Figure 2.1 shows how the dif-
ferent processing stages in the auditory system are realized in the model. The
frequency-place transformation on the basilar membrane is simulated by a lin-
ear basilar-membrane model (Schroeder, 1973; Strube, 1985). Only the channel
tuned to the signal frequency is further examined. As long as broadband noise
maskers are used, the use of off-frequency information is not advantageous for
the subjects. The signal at the output of the specific basilar-membrane segment
is half-wave rectified and lowpass filtered at 1 kHz. This stage roughly simu-
lates the transformation of the mechanical oscillations of the basilar membrane
into receptor potentials in the inner hair cells. The lowpass filtering essentially
preserves the envelope of the signal for high carrier frequencies.
Effects of adaptationare simulatedby feedback loops (Püschel, 1988; Kohlrausch
et al., 1992). The model tries to incorporate the adaptive properties of the au-
ditory periphery. It was initially developed to describe forward masking data.
Adaptation refers to dynamic changes in the transfer gain of a system in re-
sponse to changes in the input level. The adaptation stage consists of a chain
of five feedback loops in series, with different time constants. Within each sin-
gle element, the lowpass filtered output is fed back to form the denominator of
the dividing element. The divisor is the momentary charging state of the low-
pass filter, determining the attenuation applied to the input. The time constants
range from 5 to 500 ms. In a stationary condition, the output of each element is
equal to the square root of the input. Due to the combination of five elements
the stationary transformation has a compression characteristic which is close to
the logarithm of the input. Fast fluctuations of the input are transformed more
linearly (see also section 2.2.2.1). In the stage following the feedback loops, the
signal is lowpass filtered with a time constant of 20 ms, corresponding to a cutoff
frequency of nearly 8 Hz to account for effects of temporal integration.
To model the limits of resolution an internal noise with a constant variance is
added to the output of the preprocessing stages. The transformed signal after the
addition of noise is called the internal representation of the signal. The auditory
signal processing stages are followed by an optimal detector whose performance
is limited by the nonlinear processing and the internal noise. The main idea of
14 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
optimal detector
τ
1
τ
5
max
internal
noise
halfwave rectification
basilar - membrane
filtering
lowpass filtering
absolute threshold
adaptation
lowpass filtering
Figure 2.1: Block diagram of the psychoacoustical model for describing simulta-
neous and nonsimultaneous masking data with an optimal detector as decision
device (Dau, 1992; Dau et al., 1995a). The signals are preprocessed, fed through
nonlinear adaptation circuits, lowpass filtered and finally added to internal noise;
this processing transforms the signals into their internal representations.
2.2 Description of the model 15
the optimal detector is that a change in a test stimulus is just detectable if the
corresponding change in the internal representation of that test stimulus - com-
pared with an internally stored reference - is large enough to emerge significantly
from the internal noise. In the decision process, a stored temporal representation
of the signal to be detected (the template) is compared with the actual activity
pattern evoked on a given trial. The comparison amounts to calculating the cross
correlation between the two temporal patterns and is comparable to a “matched
filtering" process. The detector itself derives the template at the beginning of
each simulated threshold measurement from a suprathreshold value of the stim-
ulus. If signals are presented using the same type of adaptive procedure as in
corresponding psychoacoustical measurements, the model could be considered as
“imitating" a human observer. The optimality of the detection process refers
to the best possible theoretical performance in detecting signals under specific
conditions. The details about the optimal detection stage using signal detection
theory (Green and Swets, 1966) are described in Appendix A. The calibration
of the model is based on the 1-dB criterion in intensity discrimination tasks. In
the first step of adjusting the model parameters, this value of a just-noticeable
change in level of 1 dB was used to determine the variance of the internal noise.
In the model described above, the stimulus - in its representation after the
adaptation stage - is filtered with a time constant of 20 ms. This stage represents
the “hard-wired" integrative properties of the model and leads - in combination
with preprocessing and the decision device - to very good agreement between ex-
perimental and simulated masked-threshold data. However, for describing mod-
ulation detection data it is not reasonable to limit the availability of information
about fast temporal fluctuations of the envelope in that way. In addition, as
pointed out in the Introduction, results from several studies concerning mod-
ulation masking indicate that there is some degree of frequency selectivity for
modulation frequency. It is assumed here that the auditory system realizes some
kind of spectral decomposition of the temporal envelope of the signals. For this
reason, the following model structure is proposed to describe data on modulation
perception.
2.2.2 Extension of the model for describing modulation
perception
2.2.2.1 Stages of processing
Figure 2.2 shows the model that is proposed to describe experimental data on
modulation perception. Instead of the implementation of the basilar-membrane
model developed by Strube (1985) the gammatone filterbank model of Patter-
son et al. (1987) is used to simulate the bandpass characteristic of the basilar
membrane. The parameters of this filterbank have been adjusted to fit psychoa-
coustical investigations of spectral masking using the notched-noise paradigm
16 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
(Patterson and Moore, 1986; Glasberg and Moore, 1990). The gammatone filter-
bank has the disadvantage that the phase characteristic of the transfer function
of the basilar membrane is not described correctly, in contrast to the Strube
model (Kohlrausch and Sander, 1995). For the experiments discussed in this pa-
per, however, phase information plays a secondary role. Furthermore, in terms
of computation time, the gammatone filterbank is much more efficient than the
algorithm of the Strube model. The signal at the output of the specific filter of
the gammatone filterbank is, as in the model described above, half-wave rectified
and lowpass filtered at 1 kHz.
internal
noise
optimal detector
basilar - membrane filtering
halfwave rectification
lowpass filtering
adaptation
Figure 2.2: Block diagram of the psychoacoustical model for describing modula-
tion detection data with an optimal detector as decision device. The signals are
preprocessed, subjected to adaptation, filtered by a modulation filterbank and
finally added to internal noise; this processing transforms the signals into their
internal representations.
With regard to the transformation of envelope variations of the signal, the
2.2 Description of the model 17
nonlinear adaptation model (as implemented within the masking model) has the
important feature that input variations that are rapid compared with the time
constants of the lowpass filters are transformed linearly. If these changes are slow
enough to be followed by the charging state of the capacitor, the attenuation gain
is also changed. Each element within the adaptation model combines a static
compressive nonlinearity with a higher sensitivity for fast temporal variations.
The following stage in the model, as shown in Fig. 2.2, contains the most sub-
stantial changes compared to the model described above. Instead of the lowpass
filter, a linear filterbank is assumed to further analyze the amplitude changes
of the envelope. This stage will be called modulation filterbank throughout this
chapter. The implementation of this stage is in contrast to the signal processing
within other models in the literature (e.g. Viemeister, 1979; Forrest and Green,
1987). The output of the “preprocessing" stages can now be interpreted as a
three-dimensional, time-varying activity pattern. Limitations of resolution are
again simulated by adding internal noise with a constant variance to each mod-
ulation filter output. The calibration of the model is again based on the 1-dB
criterion in intensity discrimination tasks. A long-duration signal with a fixed
frequency and a level of 60 dB SPL was presented as input to the model. The
variance of the internal noise was adjusted so that the adaptive procedure led to
an increment threshold of approximately 1 dB. Because of the almost logarithmic
compression of signal amplitude in the model, the 1-dB criterion is also approxi-
mately satisfied over the whole input level range. Because of the relatively broad
tuning of the modulation filters (see section 2.2.2.2), some energy of the (sta-
tionary) signal also leaks into the transfer range of the overlapping modulation
filters tuned to “higher" modulation frequencies. Therefore, a somewhat higher
variance of the internal noise is required to satisfy the 1 dB-criterion compared
to the variance adjusted with the modulation-lowpass approach described in the
previous section.
The decision device is realized as an optimal detector in the same way as de-
scribed in section 2.2.1 with the extension that in the present version the detector
realizes a cross correlation between the three-dimensional internal representations
of the template and the representation of the waveform on a given trial. The in-
ternal noises at the outputs of the different modulation channels are assumed to
be independent from each other.
2.2.2.2 Modulation filterbank: Further model assumptions
It is often the case that models are developed to account only for a limited set
of experiments or a single phenomenon. Each type of experiment leads to a
model describing only the results of that experiment. As an example, de Boer
(1985) considered several types of experiments on temporal discrimination: tem-
poral integration, modulation detection and forward masking/gap detection and
discussed the corresponding “ad hoc" models which cannot be united into one
18 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
model.
The present model tries to find a “link" between the description of phenomena
of intensity discrimination and those of modulation discrimination. Assuming
linear modulation filters analyzing the modulations of the incoming signals, the
model would not be able to account for modulation masking data without any
further nonlinearity. Masking means implicitly that there must be some kind of
“information loss" at some level of auditory modulation processing.
To produce a loss of information in the processing of modulation, only the
(Hilbert-)envelope of the different output signals of the modulation filterbank is
further examined. This was suggested by Fassel (1994) to account for modulation
masking data using a sinusoidal carrier. But what about the transformation
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
0 50 100 150 200
Attenuation [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 2.3: Transfer functions of the modulation filters. In the range 0 10 Hz
the functions have a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz. Above 10 Hz up to 1000 Hz a
logarithmic scaling with a constant Q-value of 2 is applied. Only the range from
0-200 Hz is plotted.
of very low modulation rates of the signal envelope? For these low rates it is
not reasonable to extract the Hilbert envelope from the signal. It appears that
the auditory system is very sensitive to slow modulations. Slow modulations
are associated with the perception of rhythm. Samples of running speech, for
example, show distributions of modulation frequencies with peaks around 3-4 Hz,
approximately corresponding to the sequence rate of syllables (Plomp, 1983).
Results from physiological studies have shown that, at least in mammals, the
auditory cortex seems to be limited in its ability to follow fast temporal changes
2.2 Description of the model 19
in the input signal but, on the other hand, the cortex is capable of processing
rhythm-like envelope fluctuations.
A further indication that use is made of information about modulation phase
at low modulation rates is given by the successful description of intensity discrim-
ination and masking data by the original model version described above, where
the signal envelope was analyzed by the simple lowpass filter. This filtering pre-
serves all information about the modulation phase.
It is postulated within the present model that the modulation filterbank ex-
hibits two domains with different scaling. Figure 2.3 shows the transfer functions
of the modulation filters. In the range 0 10 Hz a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz
is assumed. From 10 Hz up to 1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling with a constant
Q-value of 2 is assumed. 2 For all modulation channels with a center frequency
above 10 Hz, only the envelope of the output signals is calculated.
The major part of this chapter describes and discusses experiments that have
been designed to test the postulated “effective" signal processing. As a necessary
and useful introduction to modulation experiments using narrowband noise car-
riers, the next section elaborates on some statistical properties of the envelopes
of Gaussian noises. Although the mathematical roots of this section have already
been published in 1950 by Lawson and Uhlenbeck, they have been ignored in
most studies on modulation detection using Gaussian noise.
2The transfer functions of the resonance filters can be derived from the following recursive
function: yi = e iπBΔ Δe i2πf0
Δ Δyi 1 + (1 e πBΔ) Δxi, where B is the filter bandwidth, f0
is the center frequency of the resonance filter and Δ is the inverse samplerate.
20 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
2.3 Envelope statistics and envelope spectra of
narrowband Gaussian noises
The envelope of a waveform, say y(t), can be calculated from the waveform and
its Hilbert transform:
z(t) = 1
π
+1
Z
1
y(t0)dt0
t0 t : (2.1)
The amplitude of the (linear) envelope is then defined by:
L(t) =
q
[y(t)]2 + [z(t)]2: (2.2)
For the following derivations, it is assumed that y(t) has a Gaussian distribu-
tion with mean zero and variance σ2. The Hilbert transform z(t) has the same
power spectrum and autocorrelation function as y(t). Regarding y(t) as the su-
perposition of harmonic components with unrelated phases, the process of Hilbert
transformation, which shifts the phase of every Fourier component by π
2, gives
another but independent superposition of the same kind. Therefore, y(t) and z(t)
represent two independent Gaussian distributions with the same parameters. The
envelope is thus distributed according to a Rayleigh distribution (e.g., Bracewell,
1986).
p(L) =
L
σ2e L2
2
σ2
(2.3)
with mean L = σ
q
π
2 and variance L2 (L)2 = [2 π
2]σ2.
Envelope power is defined as the square of the envelope, Penv(t) = L(t)2. The
time average of the envelope power is twice the average waveform power and
therefore, it is independent of the noise bandwidth (cf., Hartmann and Pumplin,
1988). Therefore, for example, two Gaussian waveforms with the same power but
with different bandwidths, have the same envelope power.
An interesting question is related to the spectral distribution of the envelope
power. Lawson and Uhlenbeck (1950) calculated the spectrum of the envelope
via Fourier transform of the autocorrelation function of L(t). Assuming a rect-
angular shape of the power spectrum of the carrier, as shown in the left panel
of Fig. 2.4, Lawson and Uhlenbeck have shown that the modulation spectrum
N = N (fmod), i.e., the power spectrum of the (linear) envelope of the carrier, is
given approximately by the formula:
NΔf; [?26] (fmod) π π Δf [?26] δ(fmod) +
π[?26]
4 Δf (Δf fmod); (2.4)
where Δf is the carrier bandwidth, [?26] is the power spectral density and fmod
indicates modulation frequency. This modulation spectrum is plotted in the
right panel of Fig. 2.4 (continuous line). Besides the dc-peak there is a triangular
2.3 Envelope statistics and envelope spectra of Gaussian noises 21
Frequency
Modulation power density
Power density
ρ
f0
f
∆
ρ
π
4
ρ
π
2
f
∆
Area
f
∆
Modulation frequency
Figure 2.4: Power spectrum (left panel) and modulation spectrum (right panel)
of bandlimited noise according to Lawson and Uhlenbeck (1950). The dashed
curve shows the exact shape of the (linear) modulation spectrum, whereas the
solid curve in the right panel represents an approximation.
continuous spectrum. This is a very good approximation. The exact shape is
indicated by the dashed line in the same figure. In the case of the squared
envelope, the modulation spectrum has exactly a triangular shape besides the dc-
peak.3 This corresponds to the Wiener-Chintchin theorem which states that the
Fourier transform of the squared signal equals the autocorrelation of the spectrum
of the signal.
The following aspects of Fig. 2.4 are of particular relevance for modulation
detection experiments using narrow-band noise carriers. For a constant overall
level of a noise band, the total power of intrinsic noise fluctuations, i.e., the
total area under the triangle in the right panel of Fig. 2.4, remains constant.
What changes is the spectral region over which the envelope spectrum stretches.
With increasing noise bandwidth, the (modulation) spectrum becomes broader
and flatter. For a low modulation frequency (typically below half the bandwidth
of the noise band), this leads to a reduction in (intrinsic) modulation power.
For higher modulation frequencies, above about half the noise bandwidth, the
intrinsic modulation power increases with increasing noise bandwidth.
The statistical properties and, in particular, the spectral distribution of mod-
ulation power in the modulation spectrum have not been sufficiently taken into
account in many studies on modulation perception. In fact, there are only a
few studies in which the authors attempted to involve the inherent statistical
3According to Lawson and Uhlenbeck (1950), the modulation spectrum of the squared en-
velope, Q(t) = x2(t) + z2(t), is given by the formula: Nsquare
Δf; [?26] (fmod) = 8 (Δf)2 [?26]2 δ(fmod) +
8[?26]2 (Δf fmod).
22 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
properties of the noise carriers (e.g., Zwicker, 1953; Maiwald, 1967; Fleischer,
1981). In order to find a description of the inherent modulation of the noise,
narrowband noise with a bandwidth Δf was regarded as a pure tone which was
amplitude modulated by a continuum of equal-amplitude modulation frequencies
between zero and half the bandwidth of the noise: 0 ≤ fmod
≤ Δf
2 . To derive the
total amount of intrinsic fluctuation power, two additional assumptions were in-
troduced. First, the “modulation spectrum" was weighted by a factor km(fmod),
which essentially represented a low-pass characteristic. This factor was intro-
duced to take into account the ear's reduced ability to follow fast sound fluctua-
tions compared to slow fluctuations (Fleischer, 1981 and 1982). Second, since the
individual components in the modulation spectrum are incoherent, Fleischer as-
sumed that they add according to their energies, so that the respective weighting
factors have to be squared. After integration and normalization, the extraction
of the square root led to the quantity:
kn(Δf) =
v
u
u
u
t 2
Δf
+1
Z
1
k2
m(fmod) dfmod (2.5)
The degree of fluctuation of narrow band noise itself was defined as
gn = kn(Δf) Δmn (2.6)
where mn is the effective degree of modulation of a noise signal excluding any
spectral weighting of modulation frequencies.4
Furthermore, Fleischer (1982) assumed that, if an additional amplitude mod-
ulation is imposed on a narrowband noise, the total degree of fluctuation can be
obtained by adding the respective “energies", according to:
g =
q
g2
n + g2
m =
q
(knmn)2 + (kmm)2 (2.7)
where gn is the degree of fluctuation of the narrowband noise itself and gm is the
degree of fluctuation of the imposed amplitude modulation with a modulation
degree m. Fleischer postulated that the auditory system detects differences be-
tween the modulations of successive acoustic signals as soon as the total degree
of fluctuations increases by 20%. For more details, the reader is referred to Fleis-
cher (1982). These considerations led to a prediction of a wide range of data on
modulation perception. As Fleischer admitted, the complicated processes occur-
ring when a modulated signal is modulated again, can be described by (2.7) only
approximately.
4The depth of sinusoidal amplitude modulation is often characterized by the degree of modu-
lation: m = ^
pmax ^
pmin
^
pmax+^
pmin
, based on the maximum ^
pmax and minimum ^
pmin of the sound pressure
envelope. For narrow band noise, the value of mn = 0:4 for the effective degree of modulation of
noise signals gave the best fit to Fleischer's data (Fleischer, 1982). Maiwald (1967) had worked
with a value mn = 0:7. The theoretical value based on the mathematical derivations in Lawson
and Uhlenbeck is 0.5.
2.3 Envelope statistics and envelope spectra of Gaussian noises 23
Further points of criticism concerning Fleischer's model can be discerned us-
ing the analytical results from Lawson and Uhlenbeck. The assumption that a
narrow-band noise signal of bandwidth Δf is regarded as a tone which is modu-
lated by a flat-spectrum continuum of modulation frequencies between zero and
half the noise bandwidth, is not correct. It would imply that the modulation
spectrum of noise has a flat shape in contrast to the triangular shape shown in
Fig. 2.4. Finally, as will be shown later, it is problematic to model the observa-
tion that modulation thresholds increase with increasing modulation frequency
by a weighting factor that has essentially a low pass characteristic.
24 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
2.4 Method
2.4.1 Procedure and Subjects
Modulation detection thresholds were measured and simulated using an adaptive
3-Interval Forced-Choice (3IFC) procedure. The carrier was presented in three
consecutive intervals separated by silent intervals of 300 ms. In one randomly
chosen interval the carrier was sinusoidally amplitude modulated. In the other
intervals it was unmodulated. The subject's task was to specify the interval con-
taining the modulation. During a threshold run, the modulation depth in dB
(20logm), was adjusted using a 2-down 1-up rule (Levitt, 1971) which provides
an estimate of the modulation depth necessary for 70.7% correct responses. The
step size was 4 dB at the start of a run and was divided by 2 after every two
reversals of the modulation depth until the step size reached a minimum of 1 dB,
at which time it was fixed. Using this 1-dB step size, ten reversals were obtained
and the median value of the modulation depths at these 10 reversals was used as
the threshold value. The subjects received visual feedback during the measure-
ments. The procedure was repeated four times for each signal configuration and
subject. All figures show the median and interquartile ranges based on four single
measurements. All five subjects had experience in psychoacoustic measurements
and had clinically normal hearing. They were between 23 and 29 years old and
participated voluntarily in the study.
2.4.2 Apparatus and stimuli
All acoustic stimuli were digitally generated at a sampling frequency of 30 kHz.
The stimuli were transformed to analog signals with the aid of a two-channel 16-
bit D/A converter, attenuated, lowpass filtered at 10 kHz and diotically presented
via headphones (HDA 200) in a sound-attenuating booth. Signal generation and
presentation were controlled by a SUN-Workstation using a signal-processing
software package developed at the Drittes Physikalisches Institut in Göttingen.
Several modulation-detection and modulation-masking experiments were per-
formed. In most measurements narrowband Gaussian noise centered at 5 kHz was
used as the carrier. In the masking experiment a sinusoidal carrier at 5 kHz was
used. The carrier level was 65 dB SPL in both cases. In the experiments using a
noise carrier, an independent sample of noise was presented in each interval. The
noise stimuli were digitally filtered before modulation by setting the magnitude
of the Fourier coefficients to zero outside the desired passband.
In the case of the largest applied carrier bandwidth (Δf = 314 Hz), the
stimuli were calculated differently: Broadband noise was first modulated, and
then restricted in its bandwidth to 314 Hz. In this way possible spectral cues
were avoided and the task was purely temporal in nature. This technique of
introducing modulation prior to filtering has already been used by Viemeister
2.4 Method 25
(1979) and Eddins (1993).
When generating amplitude-modulatednarrowband stimuli, the average power
of the modulatedsignalis increased by 1+m2
2 compared with the unmodulated sig-
nal. For large modulation depths detection might therefore be based on changes
in overall intensity rather than on the presence or absence of modulation. To
eliminate level cues, the digital waveforms were adjusted to have equal power in
each interval of the forced-choice trial.
In most cases sinusoidal test modulation was applied. In one experiment a
complex modulator was used, consisting of five adjacent components of a har-
monic tone complex. In each case the carrier and the applied modulators were
windowed with a length depending on the particular experiment.
26 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
2.5 Results
2.5.1 Measurements and simulations of modulation detec-
tion and modulation masking
2.5.1.1 Amplitude modulation thresholds of narrowband noise as a
function of the carrier bandwidth
Most of the following experiments are similar to those described by Fleischer
(1982). He investigated amplitude modulation detection for noise carriers using
a unmodulated carrier bandwidth of Δf = 3;31 and 314 Hz at a sound pressure
level of 80 dB. The subject's task was to detect the applied test modulation
which ranged between 3 and 150 Hz. Fleischer defined the modulation threshold
to be that modulation which yielded a proportion of correct detection of 50%. He
obtained this modulation value from psychometric functions determined using a
method of comparison in which the subjects had to note whether they perceived
a difference between the modulated and unmodulated waveform.
Fleischer's experiments were replicated in this study and compared with corre-
sponding simulations carried out with the present model. In contrast to Fleischer,
an adaptive threshold procedure was used and the carrier level was somewhat
lower (65 dB SPL). The carrier and the applied sinusoidal modulation had a du-
ration of 1 s. Both were windowed with 200 ms cosine-squared ramps. Figure
2.5 shows the present experimental results for amplitude modulation detection
employing a carrier bandwidth of 3 Hz at a center frequency of 5 kHz. The figure
shows the data of three subjects (open symbols) together with the model predic-
tions (closed symbols). The ordinate indicates modulation depth at threshold.
The abscissa represents the modulation frequency. There is a very high detection
threshold at a modulation rate of 3 Hz. This is due to the inherent statistical
fluctuations of the narrowband 3-Hz wide masker. The inherent fluctuations of
the envelope mask the additional periodic 3-Hz test modulation. With increas-
ing modulation frequency thresholds decrease and converge with those obtained
using a sinusoidal carrier at a modulation frequency of 20 Hz. These values for
a sinusoidal carrier at 5 kHz are indicated by the asterisks. The threshold re-
mains flat up to the modulation frequency of 100 Hz. This indicates that the
auditory system does not seem too slow or sluggish to follow fast fluctuations (in
this range), as is stated in many places in the literature. There is a very good
agreement between measurements and simulations. Figure 2.6 shows thresholds
using a narrowband carrier with a bandwidth of 31 Hz. Again, the modula-
tion depth, m, at threshold is measured and simulated as a function of the test
modulation frequency. The open symbols represent the measured data of three
subjects and the filled symbols indicate the simulated thresholds. The threshold
at a very low modulation rate (3 Hz) is several dB lower than in the case of the
3-Hz wide carrier. This is due to the decreasing spectral density of the inherent
2.5 Results 27
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
3 30
Figure 2.5: Modulation detection thresholds of sinusoidal amplitude modulation
as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a 3-Hz wide running
noise at a center frequency of 5 kHz. Carrier and modulation duration: 1s. Level:
65 dB SPL. Subjects: JV (2), AS (3), TD (δ), optimal detector (ε). In addition,
the modulation detection thresholds of one subject (TD) for a 5-kHz sinusoidal
carrier is indicated by (?).
fluctuations with increasing bandwidth of the carrier, when the total energy of
the modulated signal is constant (compare Sect. 2.3). In terms of the model,
less “noise energy" falls into the low-frequency modulation filter which is tuned
to the test modulation frequency. For modulation frequencies larger than half
the bandwidth of the noise (fmod > Δf
2 ) the threshold begins to decrease, in the
measurements as well as in the simulations. That is, a highpass characteristic
in the threshold function becomes apparent. However, thresholds decrease more
slowly with increasing modulation frequency than the spectrum of the inherent
envelope fluctuations itself (e.g., Lawson and Uhlenbeck, 1950). It is interesting
in this context, that even at high modulation rates { at 100 Hz and 150 Hz {
thresholds have not yet converged with those for the 3-Hz wide carrier nor with
those for the sinusoidal carrier. The threshold is about 5 dB higher than with
the 3-Hz wide carrier. This implies that the relatively slow inherent fluctuations
of the 30-Hz wide carrier make it difficult to detect the higher-frequency test
modulation. This phenomenon was also observed by Fleischer (1982) and was
28 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
3 30
Figure 2.6: Modulation detection thresholds of a sinusoidal amplitude modula-
tion as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a 31-Hz wide
running noise at a center frequency of 5 kHz. Carrier and modulation duration:
1s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: AS (3), TD (δ), JV (2), optimal detector (ε).
denoted as “cross{talk" of the inherent fluctuations of the noise on the added
modulation. This effect decreases with increasing rate of the test modulation.
This experiment reveals much about the auditory system's selectivity for mod-
ulation frequency. In the model it was necessary to use wide modulation filters
(Q=2) at high modulationfrequencies so that some energy from the low-frequency
fluctuations of the “masker" leaks through a modulation filter that is tuned to
a high modulation frequency (like 150 Hz). This leakage decreases the signal-to-
noise ratio and therefore leads to a higher detection threshold at fmod = 150 Hz
than would be the case for a more sharply tuned filter. Again, there is a good
agreement between simulated and measured data.
Figure 2.7 shows results for the carrier bandwidth of 314 Hz. In this condi-
tion the bandwidth was digitally limited after modulation to eliminate spectral
cues. The open symbols represent the measured data of three subjects whereas
simulated thresholds are indicated by the filled symbols. The threshold is higher
for a modulation rate of 3 Hz than for a rate of 5 Hz. This is probably caused by
the use of a gated carrier. Such an effect of “adaptation" has been examined in
several psychoacoustical and physiological studies (e.g., Viemeister, 1979; Sheft
2.5 Results 29
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
10 100
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
3 30
Figure 2.7: Modulation detection thresholds of a sinusoidal amplitude modula-
tion as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a 314-Hz wide
running noise at a center frequency of 5 kHz. Carrier and modulation duration:
1s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: Data from Fleischer (2), TD (δ), AS (3),
optimal detector (ε).
and Yost, 1990). Based on their results it can be assumed that the threshold
at 3 Hz would decrease if one used a continuous carrier instead of a gated one.
For modulation frequencies above 7 Hz, the threshold increases by about 3 dB
per doubling of the modulation frequency. This threshold pattern is similar to
the pattern found in “classical" measurements of the TMTF using a broadband
noise masker as a carrier, but it has a much lower cut-off frequency. Overall, the
threshold curve is very different from those obtained with smaller carrier band-
widths. With increasing modulation frequency it now becomes harder to detect
the test modulation. Also in the simulations, one obtains an increasing threshold
curve with increasing modulation frequency. Using a carrier bandwidth of 314 Hz
implies that all modulation filters (up to 150 Hz) are “stimulated" with the inher-
ent random fluctuations of the carrier envelope. The additional test component
falls in the passband of mainly one modulation filter. Assuming a constant deci-
sion criterion at threshold, the logarithmic scaling of the modulation filters with
center frequencies above 10 Hz leads to a 3-dB increase of modulation depth, m,
at threshold. In other words, to get the same signal-to-noise ratio at threshold,
30 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
a greater modulation depth is required with increasing modulation frequency.
Figure 2.8 gives an impression of how the signals are internally represented in
the model, showing an example of how the template is derived from the internal
representations of a suprathreshold test modulation and that of the unmodulated
carrier alone. The upper panel shows the three-dimensional internal representa-
tion of a 3-Hz wide carrier (centered at 5 kHz). It represents the internal activity
as a function of time and center frequency of the modulation filters. The ordinate
is scaled in model units (MU). The modulation center frequencies range from 0
to 1000 Hz. As expected, since the total energy within the modulation spectrum
of the signal is concentrated at very low modulation rates, only the lowest mod-
ulation filters are excited by the input signal, as indicated by the hatched lines
in the figure. The middle panel of Fig. 2.8 shows the internal representation of
the carrier, this time sinusoidally modulated with a modulation rate of 50 Hz
at a highly detectable modulation depth. The test modulation mainly activates
the modulation filter tuned to 50 Hz but also stimulates adjacent modulation
filters because of the relatively low modulation-frequency selectivity assumed in
the model. Again, the inherent fluctuations of the carrier itself activate the region
at low modulation frequencies. However, because of the large spectral separation
between the test modulation and the inherent fluctuations of the carrier, there
is no interaction between the modulations, that is, no competing “noise" energy
leaks into the transfer range of the test filter. As a consequence, the internal
representation of the template which is derived by subtracting the upper panel
from the middle one and normalizing the result, contains a representation of the
temporal course of the test modulation without interfering frequencies from the
carrier modulations. This template is plotted in the lower panel.
2.5.1.2 Amplitude modulation thresholds of third-octave-wide noise
bands as a function of the center frequency
In the previous section it was observed that the detection threshold for amplitude
modulation depends on the spectral density of the inherent fluctuations of the
carrier, when the total energy of the modulated signal is constant. This was ex-
amined further in the following experiment using a third-octave wide noiseband
as the carrier. The detection threshold for a modulation of 25 Hz was measured
and simulated as a function of the center frequency of the band. In the model,
only the output of the stimulated peripheral filter was analyzed. It was further
assumed that the scaling of the modulation filters does not change with the pe-
ripheral frequency region. Figure 2.9 shows the modulation depth at threshold as
a function of the center frequency of the third-octave band noise. The open sym-
bols represent measured data of three subjects; simulated thresholds are shown by
the filled circles. The measured modulation threshold decreases with increasing
center frequency. The increasing absolute bandwidth causes a decreasing density
of low-frequency inherent envelope fluctuations, if the total energy of the mod-
2.5 Results 31
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 0
2
4
6
8
10
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
Modulation filter
[MU]
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0 0
2
4
6
8
10
50
100
150
200
250
Time [s]
Modulation filter
[MU]
0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1 0
2
4
6
8
10
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Time [s]
Modulation filter
[MU]
Figure 2.8: Generation of the template representation (at the bottom) of a 50-
Hz test modulation which was impressed on a 3-Hz wide running-noise carrier
centered at 5 kHz. The template is the normalized difference between the mean
representation of the carrier plus the supra-threshold modulation (in the middle)
and the mean representation of the carrier alone (at the top). The ordinate is
scaled in model units (MU).
32 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
ulated stimulus is kept constant. As a consequence, less energy of the random
envelope fluctuations of the carrier falls within the pass band of the modulation
filter tuned to the test modulation frequency. This leads to decreasing thresh-
olds with increasing center frequency in the model. Apart from the systematic
2-dB difference in the absolute sensitivity, there is good agreement between the
simulated and measured data.
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
100 1000 10000
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Center frequency of third octave band noise [Hz]
Figure 2.9: Modulation detection thresholds for 25-Hz modulation as a function
of the center frequency of third-octave wide noise carrier. Carrier and modulation
duration: 1s. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: Data from Fleischer (1981) (2), TD
(δ), JV (5), optimal detector (ε).
2.5.1.3 Modulation masking: A harmonic tone complex as the masker
In a further experiment concerning modulation frequency selectivity, a masking
paradigm for investigating frequency selectivity in the audio-frequency domain
was adopted. It served as a test for spectral analysis in the modulation domain
- as opposed to a periodicity analysis. A sinusoidal carrier at 5 kHz was used.
As the masker modulation, a narrowband tone complex was used. This consisted
of the third through seventh component of a harmonic tone complex with a fun-
damental frequency of 30 Hz, with frequencies 90, 120, 150, 180 and 210 Hz.
In each interval, the starting phase of each spectral component was randomly
2.5 Results 33
chosen from a uniform distribution in the range 0 360°. The amplitude of each
component was 0.2 to guarantee that the resulting modulation depth of the tone
complex never exceeded m=1. Because of the random phase, the modulating
tone complex had a noise-like temporal waveform. As the signal, a sinusoidal
test modulation was impressed on the same carrier. The test modulation was
applied in the range between 20 and 120 Hz. Thus, the bandwidth of the mod-
ulated signal remained within the bandwidth of the auditory filter centered at
5 kHz. Figure 2.10 shows schematically the spectral distribution of masker and
test components in the modulation spectrum. The modulated stimuli were pre-
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
0 50 100 150 200
Log. Spectrum [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Masker modulation
Test-
modulation
Figure 2.10: Logarithmic spectrum of the Hilbert envelope of the stimuli pre-
sented in the signal interval. The signal interval contains the five components of
the masking tone complex and the signal component. The subject's task was to
detect the signal component.
sented at a level of 65 dB SPL. They had a duration of 400 ms. Test and masker
modulation were impressed for the whole duration of the carrier and were gated
together with 20 ms Hanning ramps.
The amount of modulation masking as a function of the test modulation fre-
quency is shown in Figure 2.11. The measured data are represented by the open
symbols. The filled symbols indicate the simulated data. The “masking pattern"
was derived by subtracting the unmasked threshold from the masked threshold
at each test modulation frequency. The unmasked modulation thresholds, i.e. the
threshold for a sinusoidal test modulation without any interfering masker mod-
ulation, were similar across subjects and were similar to those described in the
34 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
first experiment of this paper (see Fig. 4), where the stimuli were presented with
a different duration. These unmasked thresholds were used as a reference to eval-
uate the effect of the modulated masker. The reference threshold (not plotted)
remained more or less flat up to a modulation frequency of 120 Hz as already
shown. As can be seen from Fig. 2.11, the amount of masking increased with
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20 40 60 80 100 120
Masking [dB]
Signal modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 2.11: Amount of modulation masking as a function of the modulation fre-
quency. Carrier: 5 kHz, Modulation masker: 3rd{7th components of a harmonic
tone complex with fundamental f0 = 30 Hz. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: TD
(δ), JV (3), optimal detector (ε).
increasing test modulation frequency. The difference between the highest and
the lowest threshold was more than 10 dB. It should be pointed out that there
is no peak at 30 Hz (the “missing fundamental"). This indicates that the mask-
ing is not determined by the period of the modulation. An increasing masking
effect with increasing test modulation frequency is also seen in the simulations.
The masked threshold is directly related to the amount of masker energy falling
within the passband of the modulation filter tuned to the actual test modulation.
For the lowest test modulation rate (20 Hz) there is only a very small masking
effect in the model since the modulation filters in the low modulation frequency
region are assumed to be relatively sharply tuned (see Fig. 3). With increasing
test modulation frequency, more and more components of the masker effectively
2.5 Results 35
contribute to masking. Also, in the simulations the difference between the high-
est and the lowest masked threshold amounts to nearly 10 dB. However, there is
a systematic difference of 2-4 dB between the measured and simulated masking
patterns. However, it seems clear that there is no doubt that there is some degree
of modulation frequency selectivity, even if this selectivity seems to be relatively
broadly tuned.
2.5.2 Link between modulation detection and intensity
discrimination
2.5.2.1 Phase effects at low modulation frequencies
It has been assumed within the present model that low modulation frequencies
(0 10 Hz) are transformed without any informationloss of the modulation phase,
whereas for modulation frequencies above 10 Hz only the envelope of the output
signals is further analyzed. To obtain further justification for this approach,
Figure 2.12: Percentage of correct decisions (P(C)) in discriminating modulation
phase as a function of the modulation frequency. Carrier: 5 kHz, modulation
depth: m = 1, Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: TD, JV (dashed lines), AS (dotted
line), chance probability (horizontal line).
an experiment was performed to test the human sensitivity for the modulation
phase at low modulation rates. For this, the experimental design was modified. A
nonadaptive 3IFC-algorithm was used. The carrier was a 5-kHz sinusoid which
36 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
was sinusoidally modulated with m = 1 in each interval. The carrier had a
duration of 800 ms and was windowed with Hanning-shaped ramps of 150 ms.
The modulation had a duration of 500 ms and started 150 ms after carrier onset.
The modulation was Hanning windowed over its entire duration. In each interval
the same modulation frequency was impressed on the carrier. In the test interval
the starting phase of the modulation was uniformly distributed between 0 and
360° from trial to trial. The reference intervals contained a constant difference
in the starting phase (Δφ = 180°) of the modulation relative to the stimulus in
the test interval. The subject's task was to determine the interval that contained
the “differing" modulation starting phase (at fixed modulation depth). For each
condition, i.e. for each applied modulation frequency, the percentage of correct
decisions, P(C), was derived from 100 successive trials and plotted as a function
of the modulation frequency.
Figure 2.12 shows the data from three subjects. The ordinate represents the
percentage of correct decisions (P(C)) and the abscissa represents the test mod-
ulation frequency. For all subjects, P(C) decreases with increasing modulation
frequency. While at the lowest modulation rate (3 Hz) the subjects' ability to
discriminate the modulation starting phase is nearly perfect (100%), in contrast,
P(C) equals chance (33%) at a modulation rate of 12 Hz.
To test the role of the interaction between ramp and modulation during the
rise and fall time of the modulation ramps the same experiment was carried out
with the modification that the duration of the ramps was chosen to be two periods
of the actual test modulation. In this way the interaction between modulation
and ramp is comparable across the different conditions. The ability to discrim-
inate modulation phase deteriorated with increasing test modulation frequency
(not plotted), in the same way as before. Further experiments were performed
to investigate modulation integration effects. No significant dependence of the
results on the duration of the stationary part of the modulation in the range 300
to 700 ms was observed (not plotted).
It can be concluded that in monaural conditions using a sinusoid as the carrier,
the auditory system's sensitivity to starting phase gets lost for modulation rates
higher than around 12 Hz. Of course, in binaural conditions and also in monaural
conditions where more complex carriers are presented, human performance is
much better, indicating that across-channel information is used by the subjects.
The simulation of such conditions, therefore, would require some across-channel
processing. At the present time, this exceeds the goal of this study.
2.5.2.2 Experiments on test-tone integration and forward masking
The aim of this study was the development of a model that enables the prediction
of both modulation detection and the more common signal detection data. As
has been shown above, the implementation of the modulation filterbank allows
the prediction of modulation discrimination data. Within this model, the signal
2.5 Results 37
processing for very low modulation rates is nearly the same as in the previous
version of the model (cf. Dau et al., 1995a). To explicitly check the ability of
the new model to predict masking data as well as the previous model version,
two simulations were performed. The first condition dealt with the phenomenon
of temporal integration. In experiments with signals presented in noise maskers,
the thresholds are found to decrease with increasing signal duration up to about
200 ms (e.g., Plomp and Bouman, 1959). The auditory system seems to be able
to integrate signal intensity in detection tasks over at least 200 ms.
It was investigated whether the present model can account for this effect
using a signal at 1 kHz presented in a 600-ms section of a broadband frozen-
noise masker with a level of 77 dB SPL. Masked thresholds were determined
using the same adaptive 3IFC-procedure and the same algorithm (2-down-1-up)
as in the modulation tasks, with the exception that the signal level instead of
the signal modulation depth was adjusted during the experimental run. Figure
55
60
65
70
75
80
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Signal level at threshold [dB SPL]
Signal duration [ms]
Figure 2.13: Masked thresholds of a signal presented in frozen noise for several
signal durations. Signal: 1 kHz; Masker bandwidth: 20-5000 Hz, masker dura-
tion: 600 ms, masker level: 77 dB SPL. Subjects: AS (3), AE (2), TD (δ),
optimal detector (ε).
2.13 shows the results of the model (filled symbols) and those of three subjects
(open symbols) for signal durations of 10, 20, 40, 80, 160, 320 and 400 ms. In the
simulations only the channel tuned to the signal frequency was examined. The
38 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
experimental data are taken from Dau (1992). The onset for all signals occurred
100 ms after masker onset. The signal duration is indicated on the abscissa and
the ordinate indicates the signal level at threshold. There is a 3 dB decay per
doubling of signal duration in the measured data up to a duration of 160 ms. Such
a decrease in the threshold function is also seen in the simulation. The agreement
between measurements and simulations is very good and in fact better than that
obtained with the previous model version (cf. Dau et al., 1995b) .
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
-10 0 10 20 30 40
Signal level at threshold [dB SPL]
Signal offset relative to masker offset [ms]
Figure 2.14: Forward-masked thresholds of a brief signal as a function of its
temporal position relative to the offset of a 200-ms broadband noise masker.
Signal: 5 ms, 2 kHz; Masker duration: 200 ms, masker bandwidth: 20-5000 Hz,
masker level: 77 dB SPL. Subjects: AS (Π), SM (4), TD (δ), optimal detector
(ε).
The second condition is concerned with forward masking. Such an experiment
was initially carried out in order to test the implementation of the nonlinear
adaptation stage (feedback loops). Within the earlier version of the model, the
time constants of the nonlinear adaptation model were adjusted to fit the results
of a “normal" listener. Since the results of the model calculations depend on the
whole signal processing in combination with the decision device it was not clear in
advance that the present model, in which the lowpass filter has been replaced by
a modulation filterbank, can account for the data even if the parameters within
the nonlinear adaptation stage are kept constant.
2.5 Results 39
Figure 2.14 shows the simulated and measured thresholds for a 5-ms, 2-kHz
signal presented at the end and after a fixed 200-ms section of a broadband
frozen-noise masker. Thus, this forward masking condition includes the transition
between simultaneous and forward masking. The figure shows the threshold level
in forward masking as a function of the temporal separation between masker
offset and signal offset. The filled symbols represent the simulated thresholds
while the open circles indicate the measured data of three subjects, taken from
Dau (1992). There is good agreement between simulated and measured data.
The results of the model calculations hardly differ from those obtained with the
lowpass filter approach (not shown) (see Dau et al., 1995b). This indicates that
the most relevant information in intensity discrimination conditions is contained
in the low frequency region of the modulation spectrum within the stimulated
peripheral filter tuned to the signal frequency.
40 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
2.6 Predictions of Viemeister's model for mod-
ulation detection
The modulation filterbank concept differs considerably in its structure from the
“classical" modulation lowpass filter approach (e.g., Viemeister, 1979). So far, it
has been shown how well the modulation filterbank model describes experimental
data. In this section, predictions of the modulation lowpass filter approach are
investigated and compared with the performance of the modulation filterbank
model.
The structure of Viemeister's model is shown in Fig. 2.15. The model in-
corporates a predetection bandpass filter (with a bandwidth of Δf = 2000 Hz)
which is followed by a nonlinearity (half-wave rectification) and a lowpass filter.
Viemeister fitted the cut-off frequency of the lowpass filter to the TMTF data
obtained with a broadband noise carrier. The resulting cut-off frequency was
64 Hz. As decision variable he suggested the ac-coupled root-mean-square (rms)
value of the output of the lowpass filter which was calculated over the duration
of the observation interval. The thresholds were defined as the modulation depth
necessary to produce a certain average increment in rms value, compared to that
for an unmodulated noise.
predetection
filtering
halfwave rectification
lowpass filtering
decision device Var > c
crit
∆
Figure 2.15: Model proposed by Viemeister (1979): It consists of a predetection
bandpass filter with a bandwidth of 2000 Hz, followed by a half-wave rectification
and a lowpass filter with a cut-off frequency of 64 Hz.
2.6 Predictions of Viemeister's model for modulation detection 41
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
3 30
Figure 2.16: Simulations on the basis of Viemeister's model. Predicted modu-
lation detection thresholds are shown for three different bandwidths of the noise
carrier. Center frequency of the carrier: 5 kHz. Carrier bandwidth: [?7]: 3 Hz, N:
31 Hz, [?4]: 314 Hz, ε: 6000 Hz.
Figure 2.16 shows simulated TMTF's for the noise carriers of 3, 31, 314 and
6000 Hz bandwidth on the basis of Viemeister's model. The stimuli were the
same as in Sect. 2.5.1.1. All curves show a lowpass characteristic with a similar
cut-off frequency. This characteristic reflects the influence of the low-pass filter
stage. With decreasing carrier bandwidth the simulated TMTFs shift towards
higher thresholds. This increase is a consequence of the spectral distribution of
the intrinsic fluctuations in narrow-band noise (see Sect. 2.3). With decreasing
carrier bandwidth, the variance of the unmodulated noise carrier increases. For
the output of Viemeister's model, this increase will be seen for carrier bandwidths
that are below the bandwidth of the predetection filter and above about the
bandwidth of the lowpass filter.
This increase in threshold agrees with the experimental data for very low
modulation frequencies. At higher modulation frequencies, however, the model
predicts a totally different threshold pattern than that observed experimentally.
While the pattern of the experimental data varies systematically with increas-
ing carrier bandwidth, the model always predicts a lowpass characteristic in the
threshold function independent of the carrier bandwidth.
42 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
Figure 2.17 shows modelpredictions of amplitudemodulationdetection thresh-
olds of third-octave noise bands as a function of the center frequency. The stimuli
were the same as in Sect. 2.5.1.2. The ordinate indicates modulation depth at
threshold. Thresholds decrease monotonically with increasing center frequency.
-22
-20
-18
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
100 1000 10000
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Center frequency of third octave band noise [Hz]
Figure 2.17: Simulated modulationdetection thresholds of 25 Hz amplitude mod-
ulation as a function of the center frequency of the third octave band noise carrier.
Viemeister model: ([?4]), modulation filterbank model (ε).
This is again caused by the decreasing variance of the unmodulated noise with
increasing center frequency (and increasing linear bandwidth) at the output of
the modulation-lowpass stage, in the same way as described above. The figure
also shows the simulated data obtained with the modulation filterbank model
(replot from Fig. 2.9). There is virtually no difference between the predictions of
the two models. The predicted threshold functions account well for the data (see
Sect. 2.5.1.2).
Finally, model predictions were calculated for the modulation masking ex-
periment with the harmonic tone complex as the masker. The stimuli were the
same as in Sect. 2.5.1.3. The model of Viemeister predicts some amount of mask-
ing (around 5 dB) which is the same for all test modulation frequencies. This
frequency-independent amount of masking is caused by the specific model struc-
ture: Because there is only one modulation-frequency specific channel (the output
of the low-pass filter) the effect of the masker modulation must be the same for all
2.6 Predictions of Viemeister's model for modulation detection 43
test modulation frequencies. The experimentally observed increase in modulation
masking with decreasing spectral distance between modulation masker and test
modulation can thus be seen as strong support for a modulation-frequency spe-
cific analysis in the auditory system. The modulation-filter bank model, which
is able to reproduce at least the trend in the data, is one possible realization for
this analysis.
44 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
2.7 Discussion
The main goal of this study was to develop a model which describes the “effec-
tive" processing of envelope fluctuations in the auditory system. Experiments
concerning modulation detection and modulation masking were performed which
suggest that the auditory system realizes some kind of spectral decomposition of
the temporal envelope of the signals. There seem to be channels in the auditory
system which are tuned to modulation frequency, much like there are channels
(critical bands or auditory filters) tuned to spectral frequency.
With regard to the experiments performed and the structure of the model
that is inferred from this data, the following points have to be discussed: (a)
The role of peripheral filtering for the processing of amplitude modulation, (b)
the concept of a modulation filterbank in each critical band as opposed to a
modulation lowpass filter, and (c) the envelope statistics of the different noise
maskers employed and their influence on the thresholds obtained here.
With regard to point (a), it should be noted that the experiments in this study
have been designed in such a way that effects of peripheral filtering can be ne-
glected because the bandwidth of the modulated signals was always smaller than
the bandwidth of the stimulated peripheral filter. However, it is often mentioned
(e.g., Viemeister, 1979) that “off-frequency" listening may play a role in experi-
ments on modulation detection of amplitude-modulated tones. The observer may
increase the relative modulation depth by positioning his “internal observation
filter" away from the carrier frequency in such a way as to better equate the ampli-
tude of the carrier and one of the sidebands. The increase in relative modulation
depth resulting from listening off frequency would improve performance. The
magnitude of improvement would then depend on the attenuation characteristics
of the peripheral filter. With increasing modulation frequency this improvement
would generally increase. Within the present study, in most cases a center fre-
quency of 5 kHz was applied and the highest test modulation frequency used
was 150 Hz. Within this range of modulation frequencies (at least in the range
0-100 Hz), it is unlikely that off-frequency listening would be advantageous, and
the subject most likely monitors the internal filter at the carrier frequency. This
is supported by the observation that thresholds for a sinusoidal carrier increase
beyond a modulation rate of 150 Hz (Fassel and Kohlrausch, 1995). Nevertheless,
for higher modulation frequencies, when sideband cues become more and more
available, a different detection strategy is probably used. In modulation-detection
conditions with carrier bandwidths larger than a critical band, the influence of
the peripheral filtering on the processing of modulation frequencies can no longer
be neglected. Instead, an extension of the “single-channel" model is required
that allows integration of signal information across frequency. Such an extension
of the single-channel model to a “multi-channel" model, that is able to describe
effects of spectral integration in amplitude-modulation detection and masking, is
described in the next chapter.
2.7 Discussion 45
With regard to point (b), it should be noted that the modulation filterbank
concept proposed here is different both from the previous version of the current
model (cf. Dau et al., 1996a,b) and from models proposed in the literature (e.g.,
Viemeister, 1979). Both of these models employed some kind of a modulation
lowpass filter. The previous version of the current model was developed to de-
scribe simultaneous and forward masking data and included a lowpass filter with
a cut-off frequency of 8 Hz. Such lowpass filtering, however, would fail to describe
experiments concerning modulation masking and would also fail to describe basic
experiments concerning modulation detection with narrowband carriers at high
center frequencies (cf. Sec. 2.5.1.1). The present model allows the prediction of
modulation data and, at the same time, preserves the capabilities of the earlier
model for describing simultaneous and nonsimultanous masking data. This is be-
cause the linear modulationlowpass filtering (with a cut-off frequency at very slow
modulations) is retained in the current model and is combined with the analysis
of faster modulations by a modulation filterbank (see also the simulations with a
slightly different modulation-filterbank implementation in Münkner and Püschel,
1993). The idea behind the modulation lowpass-filter approach described in the
literature (cf., Viemeister, 1979) is that a “minimum integration time" is typically
derived from the cut-off frequency of the lowpass characteristic in the threshold
function as a parameter that describes the auditory system's temporal resolution
(for a review, see Viemeister and Plack, 1993). Such a model is capable of pre-
dicting a variety of different experiments, for example, the TMTF for broadband
noise carriers (cf. Fig. 2.7) and modulation thresholds in third-octave band noise
at different center frequencies ,( cf. Fig. 2.9). However, a model employing only
a lowpass filter fails to describe the modulation detection data for a narrowband-
noise carrier. Furthermore, such a model fails to describe the masking data using
the tone-complex modulation masker. Hence, the model proposed here consider-
ably expands the class of experiments that can be modeled correctly while still
maintaining some of the properties and predictions of the model proposed by
Viemeister (1979).
With regard to point (c) it should be noted that there are only a few studies
which have attempted to involve the inherent statistical properties of the noise
carriers (e.g., Zwicker, 1953; Maiwald, 1967a,b; Fleischer, 1981, 1982b). For ex-
ample, Fleischer (1981, 1982a,b) investigated TMTFs using narrowband noise as
the carrier. He developed a model for describing the interaction between inherent
fluctuations within a noise carrier and the detectability of added modulation. The
“modulation spectrum" was weighted by a certain factor which essentially repre-
sented a low-pass characteristic. For modulation frequencies lower than half the
bandwidth of the noise carrier, this model yields good agreement with experimen-
tal results for modulation detection and modulation difference limens (Fleischer,
1981, 1982a,b). For modulation frequencies larger than half the bandwidth of
the noise carrier, this model would always predict a lowpass characteristic in the
threshold function without regard to the applied carrier bandwidth - in the same
46 Chapter 2: Modulation detection and masking with narrowband carriers
way as shown in Sect. 2.6 for the Viemeister model. Therefore, to account for
the data, Fleischer extended the model by assuming a “cross-talk" between the
inherent fluctuations of the noise and the added modulation. He postulated a
decay at a rate of 16 dB per decade of the modulation frequency to account for
the highpass characteristic in the data. In order to find a description for the in-
herent modulation of the noise, Fleischer (1981) regarded narrowband noise with
a bandwidth Δf as a pure tone which was amplitude modulated by a continuum
of equal-amplitude modulation frequencies between zero and half the bandwidth
of the noise. But this assumption is not correct. It would imply that the modu-
lation spectrum of noise has a flat shape in contrast to the triangular shape, as
shown by Lawson and Uhlenbeck (1950) (see Sect. 2.3).
Even though the exact shape of the modulation spectrum assumed by Fleis-
cher (1981) was not correct and the subsequent explanation of the data was based
on a different concept than the one described here, Fleischer's concept of “cross
talk" between inherent envelope fluctuations of the carrier noise and the test
modulation is compatible with the bandpass analysis proposed here. Within the
modulation filterbank model, the lowpass characteristic of the threshold function
for conditions with fmod < Δf
2 does not result from a specific weighting function
used to model the “sluggishness" of the auditory system. Instead, it is a con-
sequence of the intrinsic envelope fluctuations of noise bands and their spectral
distribution on the one hand, and of the logarithmic scaling of the postulated
modulation filters on the other hand. The current model can also account for
the data using very narrowband stimuli as the carrier, describing a highpass or
bandpass characteristic in the threshold function.
2.8 Conclusions 47
2.8 Conclusions
(1) { The experiments on modulation detection and modulation masking de-
scribed here agree well with experiments from the literature. They all provide
evidence for an analysis of envelopes in terms of a separation into different mod-
ulation frequencies.
(2) { The model of the “effective" signal processing in the auditory system
proposed here is capable of quantitatively modeling most aspects of the experi-
ments described. It employs a modulation filterbank for envelope analysis that
exhibits a constant absolute bandwidth for low frequencies and a constant relative
bandwidth for modulation frequencies above 10 Hz.
(3) { While the model proposed here coincides with some structures and
predictions of the modulation lowpass model by Viemeister (1979) and an earlier
version of the current model (Dau et al., 1996a,b), it still holds for experiments
where the modulation lowpass approach clearly fails (e.g., modulation detection
for narrowband-noise carriers).
Chapter 3
Spectral and temporal
integration in amplitude
modulation detection1
Abstract
A multi-channel model, describing the effects of spectral and temporal integra-
tion in amplitude-modulation detection for a stochastic noise carrier, is proposed
and validated. The model is based on the modulation-filterbank concept which
was established in the accompanying paper by Dau et al. (1996c) for modulation
perception in narrowband conditions (single-channel model). To integrate infor-
mation across frequency, the detection process of the model optimally weights
and linearly combines the channel outputs, assuming independent observations
at the outputs. To integrate information across time, a “multiple-look" strategy
is realized within the detection stage of the model. Both data from the literature
and new data are used to validate the model.
The model accounts for the findings by Eddins [J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 93, 470{
479 (1993)] that the “time constants" associated with the temporal modulation
transfer functions (TMTF) derived for narrowband stimuli do not vary with car-
rier frequency region and that the time constants associated with the TMTFs
decrease monotonically with increasing stimulus bandwidth. The model is able
to predict masking patterns in the modulation-frequency domain, as observed
experimentally by Houtgast [J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85, 1676{1680 (1989)]. The
model also accounts for the finding by Sheft and Yost [J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 88,
796{805 (1990)] that the long “effective" integration time constants derived from
the data are two orders of magnitude larger than the time constants derived
1Modified version of the paper “Modeling auditory processing of amplitude modulation:
I. Spectral and temporal integration", written together with Birger Kollmeier and Armin
Kohlrausch, submitted to J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
48
49
from the cut-off frequency of the TMTF. Finally, the temporal-integration prop-
erties of the model allow the prediction of data in a specific temporal summation
paradigm used earlier by Wakefield and Viemeister [(J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 90,
858{865 (1991)].
The combination of the modulation filterbank concept and the optimal deci-
sion algorithmproposed here appears to present a powerful strategy for describing
modulation detection phenomena in narrowband and broadband conditions.
50 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
3.1 Introduction
One of the most interesting and fundamental questions in psychophysical research
is how the auditory system “trades" spectral and temporal resolution. One prob-
lem in this field is the question of how peripheral filtering affects the ability
to detect modulation. It is often postulated that peripheral filtering does not
limit the ability to detect modulation and that in “temporal resolution" tasks
such as modulation detection the observer broadens his “effective" bandwidth
(e.g., Viemeister, 1979). With such an assumption, the experimental data can
be simulated by a model using a “predetection" filter as broad as several critical
bandwidths to account for some kind of peripheral filtering (Viemeister, 1979).
If, in contrast, peripheral filtering in terms of critical bands has any influence
on modulation detection, the question arises how the applied modulation anal-
ysis depends on center frequency. In this vein, some authors have postulated
that the TMTF of a broadband noise is actually determined by the informa-
tion in the highest critical band excited by the stimulus (e.g., Maiwald, 1967a,b;
Van Zanten, 1980). Eddins (1993) examined spectral integration in amplitude-
modulation detection, independently varying stimulus bandwidth and spectral
region. He found that these data could not be described by models from the
literature (e.g., Viemeister, 1979).
In the previous chapter, experiments on amplitude modulation detection were
described using narrowband noise as the carrier at a high center frequency (5 kHz).
By using these conditions, effects of any peripheral or “predetection" filteringwere
minimized and, in addition, the spectral region that was being used to detect the
modulation was restricted to one critical band. A model of the “effective" signal
processing in the auditory system, including a modulation filterbank, was derived
to analyze the temporal envelope of the stimuli. This model will be called the
“modulation filterbank model" throughout this chapter.
To get more insight into the processing of modulation, several experiments
are desribed here that investigate the effects of spectral integration in amplitude-
modulationdetection, examining in particular the transition between narrowband
and broadband conditions. To test the capabilities of the modulation filterbank
model in conditions of spectral integration, some critical experiments are per-
formed and model predictions are compared with data from the literature (Ed-
dins, 1993; Sheft and Yost, 1990) and the new experimental data. To compare
results from experiments and simulations with as close a similarity in the experi-
mental details as possible, the experiments by Eddins (1993) and those by Sheft
and Yost (1990) were replicated with a slightly different threshold estimation
procedure.
Another aspect of modulation perception is the phenomenon of temporal in-
tegration in amplitude modulation detection. Temporal integration or temporal
summation refers to the well-known fact that over a range of durations there is a
decrease in threshold with increasing signal duration. Several models have been
3.1 Introduction 51
suggested in the literature to describe this phenomenon. However, differences
in the modeling strategies occur that reflect the “resolution-integration conflict"
(de Boer, 1985). In the case of temporal integration in modulation detection,
Sheft and Yost (1990) found that time constants associated with the slope of
the temporal integration function per unit duration are much larger than those
indicated by the “resolution data". The present study examines the ability of the
modulation filterbank model to account for these long “effective" time constants
found in the data.
As before, both the own experimental data from “critical" experiments as
well as data from the literature were compared with model predictions. It should
be emphasized at this point that the same parameter set was used for all model
predictions. These parameters were partly derived from earlier experiments and
partly derived from a subset of the data described here.
52 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
3.2 Method
3.2.1 Procedure and Subjects
Modulation thresholds were measured and simulated using an adaptive 3-Interval
Forced-choice (3IFC) procedure. The unmodulated carrier was presented in three
consecutive intervals, separated by silent intervals of 300 ms. In one randomly
chosen interval the carrier was sinusoidally amplitude modulated. The subject's
task was to specify the interval containing the test modulation. During a thresh-
old run, the modulation depth in dB (20logm), was adjusted by a 2-down 1-up
algorithm (Levitt, 1971) which provides an estimate of the modulation depth
necessary for 70.7% correct responses. The step size was 4 dB at the start of a
run and was divided by 2 after every two reversals of the signal level until the
step size reached a minimum of 1 dB, at which time it was fixed. Using this 1-dB
step size, ten reversals were obtained and the median value of the signal levels at
these 10 reversals was used as the threshold estimate. The subjects received vi-
sual feedback during the measurements. The procedure was repeated four times
for each signal configuration and subject. All figures show the median and in-
terquartile ranges based on four single measurements. Five subjects participated
in this study. They had some prior experience in psychoacoustic measurements
and had normal hearing. They were between 23 and 29 years old.
3.2.2 Apparatus and stimuli
All acoustic stimuli were digitally generated at a sampling frequency of 30 kHz.
The stimuli were transformed to analog signals with a two-channel 16-bit D/A
converter, attenuated, lowpass filtered at 10 kHz and diotically presented via
headphones (HDA 200) in a soundproof booth. Signal generation and presen-
tation were controlled by a SUN-Workstation using a signal-processing software
package developed at the Drittes Physikalisches Institut in Göttingen.
Several experiments on modulation detection were performed. The subject's
task was to detect a sinusoidal test modulation of a Gaussian noise carrier. Unless
explicitly stated, a carrier level of 65 dB SPL was used. During the experiments
with a noise carrier, an independent sample of the noise was presented in each in-
terval. The carrier noise stimuli were digitally filtered in the frequency domain by
Fourier transforming the whole noise waveform, setting the respective frequency
samples to zero, and transforming the signal back into the time domain. The
rms level of the modulated signal was always equated to the rms level employed
in the unmodulated trials.
3.3 Multi-channel model 53
3.3 Multi-channel model
All simulations discussed in this chapter were performed on the basis of the mod-
ulation filterbank model that was initially developed as a single-channel model as
described in the previous chapter. Figure 3.1 shows the structure of the model
which was extended to a multi-channel model in such a way that the modula-
tion analysis is performed in parallel on the output of each stimulated peripheral
filter. This may be motivated in part by results from physiological studies of
optimal detector
basilar - membrane filtering
adaptation
halfwave rectification
lowpass filtering
halfwave rectification
lowpass filtering
adaptation
internal
noise
internal
noise
Figure 3.1: Block diagram of the psychoacoustical model for describing modula-
tion detection data with an optimal detector as decision device. The signals are
preprocessed, subjected to adaptation, filtered by a modulation filterbank and
finally added to internal noise; this processing transforms the signals into their
internal representations.
the representation of amplitude modulation within the Inferior Colliculus (IC)
of the cat, where it was found that modulation frequencies are represented in a
systematic fashion orthogonal to the tonotopic organization of the IC (Schreiner
and Langner, 1988).
The model contains the same stages of signal processing along the auditory
54 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
pathway as proposed in the single-channel model. The main features are de-
scribed briefly here. For further details see Dau et al. (1996a,c). To simulate
the peripheral bandpass characteristic of the basilar membrane the gammatone
filterbank of Patterson et al. (1987) is used. The filters overlap at the -3-dB
points of their transfer functions. The summation of all filter transfer functions
would result in a flat transfer characteristic across frequency. In conditions with
broadband noise as the carrier, the filtered waveforms of the noise at the out-
puts of different peripheral filters may be considered as statistically independent
of each other. The stimulus at the output of each peripheral filter is half-wave
rectified and lowpass filtered at 1 kHz. This stage roughly simulates the trans-
formation of the mechanical oscillations of the basilar membrane into receptor
potentials in the inner hair cells. The lowpass filtering essentially preserves the
envelope of the signal for high center frequencies. Effects of adaptation are simu-
lated by nonlinear adaptation circuits (Püschel, 1988; Dau et al., 1996a,b). In a
stationary condition, the transformation has a compressive characteristic which
is close to logarithmic. Fast fluctuations of the input are transformed more lin-
early. The adapted signal is further analyzed by a linear modulation filterbank.
The parameters of the modulation filters have been determined in the previous
study by modeling modulation data for subcritical stimulus bandwidths. The
filterbank has two domains with different scaling. In the range of center frequen-
cies 0 10 Hz a constant absolute bandwidth of 5 Hz is used. Above 10 Hz
up to 1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling with a constant Q-value of 2 is used. For
modulation filters tuned to modulation frequencies larger than 10 Hz, only the
Hilbert envelope of the output is further analyzed as motivated in the previous
study. It is assumed within the present study that these parameters do not vary
across frequency, i.e., the same modulation filterbank is applied to analyze the
signal's envelope at the output of each critical band. Limitations of resolution
are simulated by adding internal noise with a constant variance to each modu-
lation filter output. The decision device is realized as optimal detector in the
same way as described in Dau et al.(1996a,b). In the decision process a stored
temporal representation of the signal to be detected (template) is compared with
the actual pattern. The comparison amounts to calculating the cross correlation
between the two temporal patterns and is comparable to a “matched filtering"
process. Assuming independent “observations" across frequency, the model com-
bines all filter outputs linearly and an optimal weighting of the channels is used.
The optimality of the detection process refers to the best possible theoretical per-
formance in detecting the signal under specific conditions, including the added
internal noise. Using such a model, a prediction of the average subject's perfor-
mance is possible on a trial-by-trial basis. Simulations of the experimental runs
can thus be performed by implementing on the computer the same threshold
estimating procedures within the model as those being used in the experiments
with human observers.
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 55
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations
3.4.1 Modulation analysis within and beyond one critical
band
In the first experiment a noise carrier centered at 5 kHz was sinusoidally mod-
ulated with a modulation rate of 5 Hz. Modulation depth at threshold was
measured as a function of the carrier bandwidth, which had one of the following
values: 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 1500, 2500, 5000 or 10000 Hz. The du-
rations of the carrier and the modulation were 500 ms including 50-ms Hanning-
shaped rise and decay ramps. The bandwidths cover the range from less than
the critical bandwidth at 5 kHz to much greater than the critical bandwidth.
The left panel of Fig. 3.2 shows the experimental results of three subjects (open
symbols). The ordinate indicates modulation depth at threshold and the abscissa
shows the carrier bandwidth. Thresholds decrease monotonically with increasing
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100 1000 10000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Carrier bandwidth [Hz]
Single-channel
model
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100 1000 10000
Carrier bandwidth [Hz]
Multi-channel
model
Figure 3.2: Modulation detection thresholds of a 5-Hz modulation as a func-
tion of the carrier bandwidth. Open symbols indicate measured data of three
subjects (same in the left and the right panel). Simulated thresholds with the
single-channel model are represented in the left panel by the filled circles. Simu-
lated thresholds with the multi-channel model are shown in the right panel (filled
circles). The filled box represents the simulated threshold for Δf = 10 kHz,
where the modulation analysis was performed using the highest critical band
excited by the stimulus. Center frequency: 5 kHz; Carrier and modulation du-
ration: 500 ms. Level: 65 dB SPL. Subjects: JV (2), TD (δ), PD (3), optimal
detector (ε, [?4]).
bandwidth. This is due to the decreasing spectral energy density of the inherent
fluctuations with increasing bandwidth of the carrier, when the total energy of
the modulated signal is constant. As a consequence, less energy of the random
56 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
envelope fluctuations of the carrier leaks into the transfer range of the modulation
filters near the test modulation frequency. In the model, this leads to a decreas-
ing threshold with increasing carrier bandwidth. Simulated thresholds obtained
with the single-channel model as described in the previous chapter are plotted in
the left panel of Fig. 3.2 (filled symbols). In this single-channel simulation, the
modulation analysis was carried out using the peripheral filter tuned to 5 kHz.
In conditions with carrier bandwidths Δf < 1000 Hz, simulated and measured
data are in good agreement. For bandwidths Δf ≥ 1000 Hz, however, system-
atic differences between simulations and experimental data occur, which increase
with increasing bandwidth. For the bandwidth Δf = 10 kHz, for example, the
difference between experiment and simulation amounts to more than 5 dB. Of
course, this discrepancy is expected, since the simulations were carried out using
only the information about the signal modulation available at the output of one
peripheral filter. The filled box in the left panel of Fig. 3.2 represents the simu-
lated threshold for a carrier bandwidth of 10 kHz, where the modulation analysis
was performed using the highest critical band excited by the stimulus. Even in
this “optimized" single-channel simulation, there remains a discrepancy of nearly
5 dB between the simulated and the measured threshold. This does not support
the hypothesis by Maiwald (1967) and Van Zanten (1980) that sufficient infor-
mation about the signal modulation is available in the highest excited frequency
region and that the detection strategy of the subject is to monitor the “internal"
filters in this high-frequency region.
The right panel of Fig. 3.2 shows the simulated data from the multi-channel
filterbank model together with the experimental data already shown in the left
panel. Using information across frequency, the model accounts for the data over
the whole range of carrier bandwidths.
3.4.2 Effects of bandwidth and frequency region
In the next experiment, effects of absolute bandwidth and frequency region on
spectral integration in modulation detection were studied using narrowband noise
as the carrier. As in the study of Eddins (1993), modulation thresholds were
measured as a function of modulation frequency for the following conditions: The
stimulus bandwidth was either 200, 400, 800, or 1600 Hz and the frequency region
was varied by adjusting the high-frequency cutoff of the noise to be either 600,
2200, or 4400 Hz. The purpose was to determine temporal modulation transfer
functions (TMTF's) by independently varying stimulus bandwidth and stimulus
frequency to determine the influence of these parameters on modulationdetection.
As in Eddins (1993), the modulated stimuli were generated by bandpass filtering
after amplitude modulation of wideband noise to avoid the possibility that the
detection of modulation would be based on spectral cues in the signal interval
rather than changes in the temporal waveform. In this way, the bandwidth of
the narrowband stimuli was the same in the presence or absence of modulation.
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 57
In addition, the stimuli were adjusted to have equal energy in each interval of
the forced-choice trial to prevent detection of modulation based on overall level
rather than on the presence or absence of modulation.
Figures 3.3 and 3.4 show the experimental data of two subjects for several
stimulus conditions. Modulation depth m at threshold is plotted as a function
of modulation frequency. The transfer functions reflect a lowpass characteristic
that is similar to data from previous studies (Rodenburg, 1972, 1977; Viemeis-
ter, 1977, 1979; Formby and Muir, 1988). The data are in very good agreement
with the results of Eddins in spite of slight differences in the threshold estima-
tion procedure between both studies. Increasing stimulus bandwidth results in
a corresponding increase in sensitivity to modulation. This systematic increase
is seen for each of the three cutoff frequencies tested. Eddins fitted his data -
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
Modulation depth m [dB]
600 Hz
2200 Hz
4400 Hz
Upper cutoff
f = 200 Hz
∆
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 800 Hz
∆
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
f = 400 Hz
∆
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 1600 Hz
∆
Figure 3.3: Modulation detection thresholds for one subject (BG) as a function of
modulation frequency with upper cutoff frequency as the parameter. Each panel
represents a different bandwidth condition: upper left: 200 Hz, upper right:
400 Hz, lower left: 800 Hz, lower right: 1600 Hz. The upper cutoff frequency is
either 4400 Hz (4), 2200 Hz (3) or 600 Hz (δ).
58 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
Modulation depth m [dB]
f = 200 Hz
∆
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 800 Hz
∆
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
f = 400 Hz
∆
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
10 100
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 1600 Hz
∆
Figure 3.4: Same as Fig. 3.3 for subject TD.
for each subject and condition - with the transfer function of a simple lowpass
filter and derived the time constant associated with the -3-dB cut-off frequency
of the specific transfer function. Two important interpretations emerged from his
analysis: First, the time constants associated with the TMTFs do not vary with
changing frequency region. Second, the time constants associated with TMTFs
decrease monotonically with increasing stimulus bandwidth. Eddins (1993) con-
cluded from the data that temporal acuity is independent of frequency region,
assuming that temporal acuity and derived time constants from the data are
directly related.
Figure 3.5 shows the corresponding model predictions obtained with the mod-
ulation filterbank model. Modulation depth at threshold is plotted as a function
of modulation frequency. The shape of the simulated threshold patterns agrees
well with the corresponding data. That is, the form of the simulated TMTF does
not depend on the frequency region of the stimuli but depends on the stimulus
bandwidth. In one - “extreme" - condition, for Δf = 400 Hz at the upper cut-off
frequency of 600 Hz, the slope of the simulated TMTF between the penultimate
and the last modulation frequency is steeper than in case of the two other cut-
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 59
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100
Modulation depth m [dB]
f = 200 Hz
∆
Upper cutoff
600 Hz
2200 Hz
4400 Hz
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 800 Hz
∆
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100
f = 400 Hz
∆
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
10 100
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 1600 Hz
∆
Figure 3.5: Simulated modulation detection thresholds as a function of modu-
lation frequency for the same conditions as in Figs. 3.3 and 3.4. Thresholds are
indicated by filled symbols.
offs at this bandwidth, and is steeper than the corresponding experimental data
in this condition. Note, however, that one of the subjects (TD) shows an in-
crease of 6 dB between the penultimate and the last modulation frequency in
this condition.
Within the model the “low-frequency" and the “high-frequency" conditions
require quite different decision strategies to determine the detection threshold.
Let us consider, for example, the bandwidth of Δf = 400 Hz and the upper
cutoff frequencies of 600 Hz and 4400 Hz, representing the low-frequency and the
high-frequency conditions, respectively. In the low-frequency condition, the mod-
ulation analysis is performed in parallel in several peripheral filters. The transfer
functions of the adjacent gammatone filters are plotted in Fig. 3.6. In the same
figure, the transfer function of the gammatone filter tuned to the high-frequency
region is also plotted. Because of the poor spectral resolution of the auditory
system at high frequencies, the modulation analysis is carried out in only one
peripheral channel. The results of the simulations in the modulation detection
60 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Attenuation [dB]
Frequency [Hz]
Figure 3.6: Transfer functions of the gammatone filters of Patterson et al. (1987)
in the low-frequency region (200 600 Hz) and the high-frequency region (4000
4400 Hz) plotted on a linear frequency scale.
task are the same for both conditions, indicating that, apparently, the poor tem-
poral resolution in the low-frequency condition is somehow compensated for by
the greater number of independent “observations" across frequency compared to
the high-frequency condition.
According to signal detection theory (SDT) (e.g., Green and Swets, 1966), it
is equivalent to detect the modulation of a single noise at the output of one wide
peripheral filter or to combine detection information across an array of bandpass-
filtered uncorrelated noises. This is true in the conditions with stochastic noise
carriers and a coherent deterministic amplitude modulation. This implies in-
dependent individual observations across frequency. When n observations are
combined, the value of the detectability index d0, denoted d0
n, is equal to the
square root of the sum of the squares of the individual values of d0
i. 2
d0
n =
v
u
u
t n
X
i
(d0
i)2 (3.1)
In deriving this formula, the decision mechanism used in the model realizes an
optimal linear combination of all filter outputs at the level of the internal repre-
2Assuming d0 =
q
2E
N from SDT where S denotes signal energy and N denotes noise energy,
and with Ei = E
n2
for coherent signals and Ni = 1
nN for uncorrelated noises, it is:
pPn
i (d0
i)2 =
qPn
i
2Ei
Ni
=
qPn
i
2E
n2Ni
=
qPn
i
2E 1=n
N =
qPn
i
2E
N = d0
n.
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 61
sentation of the stimuli.3
A factor limiting the validity of the above formula is the absolute thresh-
old for detecting modulation of a certain rate. Such a threshold was introduced
within the present model by the addition of internal noise to the output of each
modulation filter. For a sinusoidal carrier this internal noise results in a thresh-
old of detectability for a low-frequency amplitude modulation of about -27 dB.
If, in the case of a noise carrier, the imposed modulation is strongly attenuated
within one or more peripheral filters, the detectability of the modulation is not
determined solely by the inherent statistics of the noise carrier but is also de-
termined by the internal noise. As a consequence, in such a condition, some of
the (low-frequency) peripheral filters do not contribute to the information about
the signal modulation leading to an increased detection threshold. Therefore, in
an “extreme" condition as described above, namely in the case of the highest
imposed modulation frequency in the lowest frequency region, the width of the
peripheral filter should have an influence on modulation detection.
Apart from such specific conditions, however, there is a very good agreement
between experiment and model achieved with the traditionally assumed width of
the auditory filters.
3.4.3 Further experiments and analytical considerations
From the previous section it can be concluded that, for broadband noise carriers,
there is little influence of peripheral filtering on modulation detection. Thus,
the changes in TMTF shape with increasing carrier bandwidth must be caused
by the properties of “higher" processing stages in the auditory pathway. The
results of the experiments from the first part of the previous chapter dealing
with stimulus bandwidths smaller than a critical band could be explained as
masking effects in the modulation-frequency domain. A quantitative description
of the data was possible when the modulation-frequency selectivity was modeled
by a modulation filterbank. Depending on the actual carrier bandwidth, the
simulations led to a highpass or lowpass characteristic of the threshold pattern,
in very good agreement with the data.
To understand better the transition between narrowband and broadband con-
ditions an additionalexperiment was performed, in which carrier bandwidths were
varied on a finer scale than in previous studies and only a few modulation fre-
quencies were imposed. Figure 3.7 shows experimental data for three subjects,
whose task was to detect a modulation of 5, 25 or 100 Hz that was imposed on
a noise carrier with a level of 65 dB SPL with a fixed upper-cutoff frequency of
6 kHz. The parameter was the carrier bandwidth which was either 1, 5, 10, 25,
50, 100, 250, 500, 1000, 4000 or 6000 Hz. In all conditions of this experiment, the
3This is equivalent to assuming that the individual observations are combined via the like-
lihood ratio (see Appendix A; Green and Swets, 1966).
62 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
modulated stimuli were generated by modulating after bandpass filtering. The
stimuli were shaped with 50 ms Hanning ramps.
The figure shows modulation depth at threshold as a function of the carrier
bandwidth. The parameter in this plot is the imposed modulation frequency
(fmod = 5;25;100 Hz). The figure shows three “bandpass-shaped" curves. For
each curve, the maximum occurs at a bandwidth equal to 2{5 times the imposed
modulation frequency.
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1 10 100 1000 10000
Modulation depth m [dB]
TD
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1 10 100 1000 10000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Carrier bandwidth [Hz]
JV
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1 10 100 1000 10000
MH
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1 10 100 1000 10000
Carrier bandwidth [Hz]
MEAN
Figure 3.7: Modulation detection thresholds as a function of the carrier band-
width. Parameter is the signal modulation frequency: fmod = 5 Hz (δ),
fmod = 25 Hz (3), fmod = 100 Hz (4); Subjects: TD (upper left), MH (up-
per right), JV (lower left), mean (lower right).
In the following, the experimental data are compared analytic calculations.
They are based on analytical properties of the statistics and spectral distribution
of power in the modulation spectra of noise signals, as derived in the previous
chapter. For the calculation, it is first assumed that peripheral filtering does
not play a role in modulation detection in the stimulus conditions considered
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 63
here. Second, only the modulation filter tuned to the current signal modulation
frequency is considered, assuming that the observer selects the modulation filter
with the greatest signal-to-noise ratio at the output.
Figure 3.8 shows the transfer functions of the modulationfilters that are tuned
to the modulation frequencies 5, 25 and 100 Hz, respectively, as they are used
in the model. The scaling of the modulation filters was chosen according to the
results from the previous study. The functions are given on a log-log plot.
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
1 10 100
Attenuation [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 3.8: Transfer characteristic of the modulation filters tuned to 5, 25 and
100 Hz, respectively. The parameters of the filters were chosen according to the
previous chapter.
To calculate the spectral power density of a specific noise within the transfer
range of a specific modulation filter with modulation center frequency CF, the
modulation power spectrum of the carrier, N, was multiplied by the squared
amplitude transfer function of the modulation filter (from Fig. 3.8), denoted
as WCF = WCF (fmod). The modulation power spectra of the noise carriers
were calculated according to the analytical calculation by Lawson and Uhlenbeck
(1950) (see Sect. 4 of the previous chapter). They have approximately a triangle-
like shape according to the formula:
NΔf; [?26] (fmod) π π Δf [?26] δ(fmod) +
π[?26]
4 Δf (Δf fmod); (3.2)
64 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
where Δf is the carrier bandwidth, [?26] is the spectral power density and fmod
indicates modulation frequency.
Figure 3.9 shows, as an example, the spectral power density as a function
of modulation frequency considering only the modulation filter tuned to 25 Hz.
The parameter in this figure is the noise bandwidth Δf. To determine the total
0
100
200
300
400
500
0 20 40 60 80 100
Power density
Modulation frequency [Hz]
f = 10 Hz
f = 25 Hz
f = 50 Hz
f = 100 Hz
f = 250 Hz
∆
∆
∆
∆
∆
Figure 3.9: Modulation power density of noise at the output of the modulation
filter tuned to 25 Hz. Parameter is the bandwidth of the noise.
(ac-coupled) modulation power of the noise within the transfer function of the
specific modulation filter, the curves from this figure must be integrated across
modulation frequency. This integrated magnitude, the (ac-coupled) modulation
power P = P (fmod), is proportional to the area under each curve of the figure
and is quantitatively given by:
PΔf; [?26]; CFmod
=
1
Z
0
NΔf; [?26] (fmod) Δ WCFmod
(fmod) dfmod (3.3)
Figure 3.10 shows this modulation power as a function of the noise bandwidth
for three modulation filters tuned to 5 Hz (ε), 25 Hz ([?7]) and 100 Hz (N). In
addition, for comparison, the modulation power resulting from integration within
the transfer range of a modulation lowpass filter as proposed by Viemeister (1979)
is plotted in the figure (+). The corresponding curve has a “lowpass" shape
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 65
100
1000
10000
1 10 100 1000
Power
Carrier bandwidth [Hz]
Figure 3.10: Integrated modulation power of noise at the output of the modula-
tion filter tuned to 5, 25, and 100 Hz as a function of noise bandwidth. Param-
eter is the imposed modulation frequency: fmod = 5 Hz (ε), fmod = 25 Hz ([?7]),
fmod = 100 Hz (N). In addition, the integrated modulation power at the output
of a modulation low-pass filter (Viemeister, 1979) is plotted (+).
whereas the three modulation power functions at the output of the modulation
filters have a “bandpass" shape.
In order to compare the shapes of the modulation power curves for the dif-
ferent modulation frequencies, it is necessary to take into account how the cor-
responding filters attenuate the imposed test modulation. For the filterbank,
the attenuation is the same for all three modulation frequencies, because the
modulation filter tuned to the test modulation is always used. The modulation
lowpass filter, on the other hand, attenuates modulation frequencies according to
its transfer characteristic. Viemeister suggested a cut-off frequency of 64 Hz. For
such a characteristic, the curves for fmod = 5 Hz and fmod = 25 Hz are exactly
the same whereas the curve for fmod = 100 Hz is shifted towards higher values
(not shown). The form of the pattern, however, remains the same.
The calculated pattern of the modulation power at the output of the specific
modulation filters has a similar form to the threshold pattern from Fig. 3.7. In
particular, the peak frequencies in the calculated pattern correspond to those in
the measured data. In contrast, the pattern from the calculations based on a
modulation lowpass filter, according to Viemeister (1979), differs strongly from
66 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
the measured data.
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1 10 100 1000 10000
Modulation depth m at Threshold [dB]
Carrier bandwidth [Hz]
Figure 3.11: Simulated modulation detection thresholds on the basis of the mod-
ulation filterbank model, plotted as a function of the carrier bandwidth. Param-
eter is the signal modulation frequency: fmod = 5 Hz (ε), fmod = 25 Hz ([?7]),
fmod = 100 Hz (N).
It is questionable if modulation detection thresholds should be directly com-
pared with overall modulation power. In the present and other models of mod-
ulation detection for noise carriers, the limiting quantity is the variation in the
external stimulus. Thus, it is necessary to estimate not only the amount of modu-
lation power, but also the variation of this value. For a single spectral component
in the modulation spectrum of a bandpass Gaussian noise, the power is exponen-
tially distributed (Green et al., 1992). This distribution has the specific property
that the mean and standard deviation are equal. If one assumes that the standard
deviation in the external noise modulation is the limiting factor in modulation
detection, one can expect that the pattern of modulation thresholds runs parallel
with the calculated modulation power in Fig. 3.10. This argument holds, how-
ever, only as long as one has only one modulation spectrum component within the
passband of a modulation filter. If the filter passes several spectral components,
the distribution of the total power has to be calculated by adding exponential
distributions. Without going into mathematical details, it can be stated that the
ratio between the standard deviation and mean of the total power will decrease
with the number of statistically independent spectral lines. The reason for the
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 67
decrease is that means and variances add linearly. This statistical effect will
lead to somewhat lower thresholds for higher modulation filters. Applied to the
three curves in Fig.3.10, which have comparable peak power values, this reason-
ing predicts modulation thresholds for the peaks which are lower the higher the
modulation frequencies is, in accordance with the experimental data in Fig. 3.7.
The point of the analytic considerations was to figure out what essential mech-
anisms are involved in the modulation detection tasks studied here. To establish
realistic detection thresholds it is necessary to include some auditory signal pro-
cessing and detection device as realized, for example, in the modulation filterbank
model. Fig. 3.11 shows corresponding simulated thresholds obtained with the
modulation filterbank model. In agreement with the data, the threshold func-
tions have a “bandpass" shape and the peaks of the three curves are lower the
higher the modulation frequency is. However, especially for fmod = 25 and 100
Hz, the model overestimates human performance in conditions with Δf ≥ 1000Hz
by about 5 dB.
The following two conclusions can be derived from this analysis. Firstly,
peripheral filtering seems to play no major role in modulation detection. The
whole bandwidth is used by the system. Secondly, it is the interaction between
the statistical properties of the applied stimuli with the modulation filters that
accounts for the data.
3.4.4 Predictions for modulation masking using broad-
band noise carriers
Houtgast (1989) adopted a classical masking paradigm for investigating frequency
selectivity in the modulation frequency domain: the detectability of a test mod-
ulation in the presence of a masker modulation, as a function of the spectral
difference between test and masker modulation.
The carrier in all his experiments was a pink noise with a spectrum level
in the 1-kHz region of about 25 dB SPL. After applying the modulation, the
carrier was bandpass filtered between 1 and 4 kHz and added to unmodulated
pink noise with a complementary (bandstop) spectrum. The masking patterns
(of the first experiment) were obtained for each of three 1/2-oct-wide bands of
masker-modulation noise. The carrier noise was multiplied both with the masker
and the target modulator waveform. Center frequencies were 4, 8, or 16 Hz. The
left panel of Fig. 3.12 shows the resulting masking patterns from that study. The
three curves show a peaked characteristic: the amount of masking decreases for
increasing frequency difference between test modulation and masker modulation.
The lower curve in the figure shows the unmasked modulation detection threshold
level as a function of modulation frequency. For details about the experimental
setup, stimuli and procedure, see Houtgast (1989).
The right panel of Fig. 3.12 shows results from simulations obtained with the
68 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
2 4 8 16 32 64
Modulation depth m [dB]
Test-modulation frequency [Hz]
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
2 4 8 16 32 64
Modulation depth m [dB]
Test-modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 3.12: The lower curve in both panels shows the unmasked modulation
detection thresholds as a function of modulation frequency. Each of the three
peaked curves show the masked modulation-threshold pattern for one of the 1/2-
oct-wide masker-modulation bands centered at 4 Hz (4), 8 Hz (3), or 16 Hz (5).
The carrier in all measurements was a pink noise ranging from 1 to 4 kHz. The
left panel shows data from Houtgast (1989). The right panel shows predictions
with the multi-channel model.
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
-10 -5 0
Modulation depth m [dB]
Masker-modulation level [dB]
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
-10 -5 0
Modulation depth m [dB]
Masker-modulation level [dB]
"threshold_peg.gwr"
"hout_sim_pegref.gwr"
"hout_sim_pegref.gwr"
"hout_sim_peg-5dB.gwr"
"hout_sim_peg-5dB.gwr"
"hout_sim_peg-10dB.gwr"
"hout_sim_peg-10dB.gwr"
Figure 3.13: Modulation-detection thresholds for an 8-Hz modulation as a func-
tion of the relative masker-modulation level for the masker-modulation band
centered at 8 Hz. Left panel: Data from Houtgast (1989). Right panel: Corre-
sponding predictions of the modulation filterbank model.
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 69
multi-channel version of the modulation filterbank model. The simulated thresh-
olds for the unmasked condition are systematically lower than the experimental
data from Houtgast. This might be caused by the different presentation of the
masker and by differences in the applied threshold procedure. Houtgast used
a continious masker whereas in the simulations the masker was gated. While
in the simulations, a 3-IFC procedure with a 2-down 1-up adaptation rule was
used, Houtgast measured thresholds in a 2-IFC procedure with a 3-down 1-up
adaptation rule. Besides this systematic difference of about 2-5 dB, both the un-
masked thresholds and the masked threshold in both panels agree very well with
each other. The simulated masked patterns show the same peaked characteristic,
with less masking for increasing frequency difference between test and masker
modulation.
An additional observation can be made from the unmasked modulation data.
The difference in the experimental thresholds at 4 and 64 Hz, respectively, amounts
to about 11 dB. This is much more than observed in corresponding measurements
with a white-noise carrier (cf., Figs. 3.3 and 3.4 in the Sect. 3.4.2). Interestingly,
a similar difference between white and pink noise is also observed in simulations.
When the experimental condition of Houtgast is simulated with a white-noise
carrier, thresholds at 4 Hz modulation are the same as for pink noise. The in-
crease between 4 and 64 Hz is, however, smaller for white noise and amounts to
about 7 dB. At present there is no simple explanation for this difference.
As in the study of Houtgast (1989), the effect of a reduction of the masker-
modulation level was investigated for one of the conditions in Fig. 3.12 (the
8-Hz modulation frequency for the noise band centered at 8 Hz). The masker-
modulation level used to obtain the middle threshold function in Fig. 3.12 was
reduced by 5 and 10 dB, respectively. The effect on the model prediction is shown
in Fig. 3.13. As in the data of Houtgast, the reduction of the threshold level is
equal to the reduction of the masker-modulation level. This indicates that the
detection threshold is associated with a constant signal-to-noise ratio.
To further test the ability of the modulation filterbank model to account for
modulation masking data the effect of varying the bandwidth of the modulation
masker was investigated. Thresholds were obtained for a test modulation fre-
quency of 8 Hz for various values of the bandwidth of the masker modulation.
The center frequency and the spectral density within the passband were kept con-
stant. Figure 3.14 shows results from the study of Houtgast (1989) (left panel)
and model predictions obtained with the present model (right panel).
Houtgast (1989) also found that for small bandwidths, the modulation thresh-
old increases by 3 dB for each doubling of the masker-modulation bandwidth,
whereas for large bandwidths, the threshold remains constant. He proposed,
that the modulation detection threshold is associated with a constant signal-to-
noise ratio within a filter centered at the test-modulation frequency. To a first
approximation, indicated by the two straight lines in the left panel of Fig. 3.14,
he suggested a width of the modulation filter of about 1/2{1 oct.
70 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1/8 1/4 1/2 1 2 4
Modulation depth m [dB]
Masker-modulation bandwidth [octaves]
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
1/8 1/4 1/2 1 2 4
Modulation depth m [dB]
Masker-modulation bandwidth [octaves]
Figure 3.14: Modulation-detection thresholds for an 8-Hz modulation as a func-
tion of the bandwidth of the masker-modulation noise centered at 8 Hz. Left
panel: Data from Houtgast (1989). Right panel: Corresponding predictions of
the modulation filterbank model.
In the present model, the modulation filter centered at 8 Hz has a bandwidth
of 5 Hz. This bandwidth lies exactly in the range of 1/2 to 1 octave that was sug-
gested by Houtgast. The model predicts an increase in threshold of about 6 dB
between 1/8 and 1/2 octave of modulation-masker bandwidth. For modulation-
masker bandwidths larger than a 1/2-oct, it predicts an almost constant thresh-
old. This is in agreement with the data of Houtgast. Thus, modulation masking
is only effective within a “critical" band around the test-modulation frequency.
The results from the simulations of the section further support the hypothe-
ses that the envelope fluctuations of the stimuli are processed by modulation-
frequency-selective channels.
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 71
3.4.5 Temporal integration in modulation detection
Thresholds for detecting sinusoidal amplitude modulation of a wideband noise
carrier (lowpass filtered at 6 kHz) were measured and simulated as a function
of the duration of the modulating signal. The experimental design was chosen
according to the study of Sheft and Yost (1990). The carrier was gated with a
duration that exceeded the duration of modulation by the combined stimulus rise
and fall times. Stimuli were shaped by a 25.6-ms rise-fall time. The combinations
of modulation frequency and numbers of modulation cycles for each condition are
listed in Table 3.1. Because modulation was restricted to the constant-amplitude
portion of the carrier (thus excluding the ramps), stimulus duration was always
51.2 ms longer than the modulation duration listed in the Table 1 (see Sheft and
Yost, 1990).
Modulation frequency [Hz]
cycles 2.5 5 10 20 40 80 160 320 640
1 400 200 100 50 25 12.5 6.25
2 400 200 100 50 25 12.5
4 400 200 100 50 25 12.5
8 400 200 100 50 25
16 400 200 100 50
32 400 200 100 50
64 400 200 100
128 400 200
256 400
Table 3.1: Parameter values listing the modulation duration [in ms] for the com-
bination of modulation frequency and number of modulation cycles used in each
condition.
Figure 3.15 show the experimental data of two subjects. The modulation
depth at threshold is plotted as a function of the modulation frequency. The
parameter is the modulation duration. The data agree very well with those from
Sheft and Yost (1990). The curves represent the “classical" broadband TMTF
often described in other studies (e.g., Viemeister, 1979; Formby and Muir, 1988).
The data show somewhat increased thresholds for the two lowest modulation
frequencies, fmod = 2:5 and 5 Hz. This is caused by the “gating" of the carrier
in this experiment in contrast to experiments where the carrier was presented
continuously, as discussed in previous studies (e.g., Viemeister, 1979; Sheft and
Yost, 1990). It is assumed that adaptation effects are responsible for this effect,
reflecting the temporal relationship between the carrier onset and the onset of
72 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
2.5 5 10 20 40 80 160 320 640
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
TD
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
2.5 5 10 20 40 80 160 320 640
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
AS
Figure 3.15: Measured TMTF's of two subjects using broadband noise as a
carrier. Parameter is the duration of the imposed test modulation. Carrier: 0-
6 kHz; Level: 65 dB SPL; Modulation duration: δ: 400 ms, 3: 200 ms, 4:
100 ms, 2: 50 ms, 5: 25 ms, δ: 12.5 ms, [?2]: 6.25 ms; Subjects: TD (left panel),
AS (right panel).
modulation. The carrier onset produces a change in the level of the internal
representation that is large relative to the changes produced by the sinusoidal
modulation and might therefore interfere with the detection of the modulation,
especially at low modulation frequencies (Viemeister, 1979). For modulation
frequencies larger than 2.5 Hz, the threshold is roughly flat up to a modulation
frequency of 40 Hz. It increases slightly at 80 Hz and further increases at a rate
of approximately 3 dB/octave for higher modulation frequencies.
Figure 3.16 shows the corresponding simulated thresholds obtained with the
modulation filterbank model. The ordinate indicates modulation depth at thresh-
old and the abscissa represents modulation frequency. The simulated threshold
pattern is in very good agreement with the pattern found in the measured data.
It shows increased thresholds for the two lowest modulation frequencies, 2:5 and
5 Hz, leading to a bandpass characteristic of the threshold function for the two
greatest durations of 200 and 400 ms. This is caused by the dynamic properties
of the adaption model (Püschel, 1988; Dau et al., 1995a). The feedback loops
of the adaptation model produce a considerable overshoot at the carrier onset
that decreases the detectability of the signal modulation especially at very low
modulation rates (see discussion in Viemeister, 1979; Sheft and Yost, 1990).4
4Sheft and Yost (1990) found that even when presenting the carrier with a fixed duration
that included a 500 ms carrier fringe preceding the onset of modulation, threshold patterns
exhibit a bandpass characteristic. The adaptation model of Püschel (1988) would not account
for such a long-term adaptation effect.
3.4 Results from measurements and simulations 73
-30
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
2.5 5 10 20 40 80 160 320 640
Modulation depth m at threshold [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 3.16: Simulated TMTFs obtained with the current model for the same
conditions as in Fig. 3.15.
The time constants derived from temporal integration per unit duration are in
very good agreement with those found in the measured data. The model therefore
accounts for the long “effective" integration time constants whose values are much
larger than the time constants indicated by the “resolution data" (Sheft and Yost,
1990; Viemeister, 1979).
74 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
3.5 Discussion
In this study the performance of the modulation filterbank model with respect
to spectral and temporal integration in amplitude modulation detection was de-
scribed. Several “critical" experiments were performed or taken from the lit-
erature and model predictions were compared with experimental data. As an
extension to the single-channel model proposed in Dau et al. (1996c), in which
the concept of the modulation filterbank was established and the parameters of
the modulation filters were fitted to data for narrowband carriers, the modulation
analysis was applied to broadband conditions. In this multi-channel version of the
model, the temporal envelopes of the stimuli were processed by the same modula-
tion filterbank in parallel at the output of each stimulated peripheral filter. The
“observations" at the output of each channel were assumed to be independent of
each other. The decision device was realized in such a way that all channels were
combined linearly and an optimal weighting of the channels was used.
3.5.1 Spectral integration
In the modulation detection conditions considered in this study using stochastic
noise carriers and coherent signal modulation, peripheral filtering generally does
not limit the ability to detect modulation. This has been interpreted in some
former studies as the observers' ability to increase their “effective" bandwidth in
detecting wideband signals (Green, 1960; Bos and de Boer, 1966; Schacknow and
Raab, 1976). As already discussed by Viemeister (1979), the mechanism behind
such a combination and the stage of processing where it occurs are still unclear.
It has been suggested in the literature (Green and Swets, 1966) that in detection
experiments with multicomponent signals, combination probably occurs at a high
level: the observer can combine information nearly optimally from widely spaced
critical bands. This model approach was adopted within the current study and
may be denoted as “auditory filter-based approach". In contrast, in models for
modulation detection conditions, it has been previously assumed that the com-
bination of peripheral filter outputs occurs at a very early stage of processing
(Viemeister, 1979). In this context, the model proposed by Viemeister (1979)
that includes a wide predetection bandpass filter (Δf = 2000 Hz) followed by
a nonlinearity and a lowpass filter, can account for modulation detection data
using (broadband) noise as the carrier. This model approach may be denoted
as “predetection-filter approach". Using broadband carriers, it is not possible to
discriminate between such a predetection-filter approach and the auditory filter
based approach. Both approaches are mathematically equivalent for broadband
carriers, as long as modulation is processed linearly within the model. This is the
case for the present model, as described in Dau et al. (1996a,c). Similarly, it is
not possible to discriminate whether there is one “large" modulation filterbank
behind the combined outputs of all peripheral channels (cf., Yost et al., 1989) or,
3.5 Discussion 75
alternatively, whether there is a modulation filterbank that separately analyzes
the output of each peripheral channel before the information is combined. How-
ever, the bandwidth of the predetection filter of the Viemeister model is larger
than the critical band estimates for most of the auditory range. This approach
therefore fails to describe the data in an appropriate way for conditions in which
spectral resolution of the auditory system plays any role. The present model gives
a more general description of the processing of modulation in the auditory system
and is also applicable to spectral-masking conditions, as was shown in Verhey and
Dau (1996). Thus, the auditory-filter-based approach has clear advantages over
the predetection-filter approach.
One of the main results of this study is that all the data could be described
in terms of masking phenomena in the modulation-frequency domain. Analogous
to the results described in Dau et al. (1996c), thresholds are mainly determined
by the amount of the inherent modulation power of the specific noise carrier
that falls into the transfer range of the modulation filter tuned to the actual
modulation frequency. The model can therefore account for the experimental
findings of Eddins that “time constants" derived from the TMTF do not vary
with changing frequency region and decrease with increasing stimulus bandwidth.
Note, however, that this model does not support the notion of one resolution
“time constant" derivable from the data because the lowpass characteristic in the
modulation data for broadband noise is not caused by a corresponding “lowpass-
weighting" of fast envelope fluctuations by the auditory system. Instead, the data
is explained in terms of the “interaction" of statistical properties of the stimuli
in the modulation frequency region and the scaling of the modulation filters.
3.5.2 Temporal integration
The phenomenon of temporal integration refers to the fact that, over a range of
durations, there is a decrease in threshold with an increase in the duration of
the signal. Several models have been suggested in the literature that describe
the phenomenon of temporal integration. For example, to describe the threshold
function observed in typical test-tone integration data, an integration process is
assumed that occurs over relatively long time periods, i.e., of the order of several
hundreds of milliseconds. The most prominent approach is the energy detection
model (Green, 1960; Green and Swets, 1966) in which decisions are based on the
power of the input integrated over a fixed time period. Another class of mod-
els assumes a shorter integration time to account for temporal resolution such
as modulation detection (Viemeister, 1979), gap detection (Forrest and Green,
1987) and temporal aspects of nonsimultaneous masking (Moore et al., 1988; Ox-
enham and Moore, 1994). The discrepancy between these two modeling strategies
is often described as illustrating the “resolution-integration" paradox (de Boer,
1985).
In recent studies, however, it has been argued that the disparity between the
76 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
integration and the resolution time constants is not a real problem (Viemeister
and Wakefield, 1991). They pointed out that the observation of a 3-dB decrease
in threshold for each doubling of duration - as seen in typical test-tone integration
data - means that the auditory system behaves as if perfect power integration
occurs but that the system is not necessarily performing the operation of mathe-
matical integration. Therefore it might be important to distinguish between the
phenomenon of temporal integration and the process that accounts for the phe-
nomenon. Viemeister and Wakefield (1991) provided evidence that integration
with a long time constant, such as proposed by the classical models, does not
occur in auditory processing. They showed that the threshold for a pair of short
pulses yields classic power integration only for pulse separations of less than 5-
10 ms. For longer separations, the thresholds did not change with separation and
the pulses appeared to be processed independently (cf. Zwislocki et al., 1962). In
a second experiment, Viemeister and Wakefield (1991) showed that the threshold
for a pair of tone pulses was lower than for a single pulse, indicating some type of
integration, but was not affected by level changes of the noise which was presented
between the two pulses. The experimental results from that study are plotted
in the left panel of Fig. 3.17. It shows the average thresholds for the first pulse
alone (squares), the second pulse alone (circles), and for the pulse pair (triangles)
as a function of the relative level of the intervening noise. The thresholds for
the first pulse alone do not depend on the noise level. There is a slight increase
in threshold for the second pulse reflecting forward masking. The thresholds for
the pulse pair are about 2.5 dB lower than those for either pulse alone and do
not depend on the level of the intervening noise (for details see Viemeister and
Wakefield, 1991). These data cannot be explained by long-term integration.
Furthermore, as discussed by Viemeister and Wakefield (1991), the results of
this second experiment are also inconsistent with the model proposed by Penner
(1978). Penner showed that a compressive nonlinearity followed by a short-time
constant integration can result in long effective integration. However, such a
model { as an example of the class of “single-look" integration models { would
predict a certain change in threshold depending on the energy of the noise between
the two pulses, since the lower threshold for a pulse pair compared to that for
the single pulse requires integration at least over the time of separation of the
two pulses.
To account for the data, Viemeister and Wakefield (1991)proposed a “multiple-
look" model. With such a model, “looks" or samples from a short-time-constant
process are stored in memory and can be processed “selectively", depending on
the task. The short time constant allows the model, in principle, to account for
temporal resolution data. The combination of a short time constant and selec-
tive processing allows the model to also account for the data from the pulse pair
experiment described above. The authors suggested that in temporal integra-
tion tasks, the long effective time constants may result from the combination of
information from different looks, not from true long-term integration. However,
3.5 Discussion 77
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
-6 0 6
dB SPL
Increment [dB]
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
-6 0 6
dB SPL
Increment [dB]
Figure 3.17: Left panel: Data from Viemeister and Wakefield (1991): Average
thresholds as a function of the relative level of the intervening noise. Squares:
first pulse only; circles: second pulse only; triangles: pulse pair. Right panel:
Corresponding simulated thresholds on the basis of the present model.
there are some open questions with regard to the multiple-look model proposed
by Viemeister and Wakefield (1991). A very basic question is concerned with
what is meant by a “look". The authors discuss the question whether a look
may be considered as a sample from the envelope-like waveform from the short
temporal window that defines a look. But what is the shape of such a window?
What about the correlation between successive looks or samples and how are
these looks or samples combined to arrive at a decision statistics? The predicted
temporal integration function described in the study of Viemeister and Wakefield
(1991) depends strongly on how the looks are weighted and combined.
Nevertheless, the basic concept of the multiple-looks approach is to take into
account that the observer attempts to use all the samples from the observation
interval. For the detection of a tone, for example, an increase in the duration of
the tone increases the number of samples and results in an improvement in per-
formance. The model proposed in the present study contains an optimal detector
as a decision device. The detection process can be considered as a “matched
filtering" process as already described in Dau et al. (1996a). This implies that a
variable time constant is available that is matched to the signal duration, depen-
dent on the specific task, i.e., the model has at its disposal a continuum of time
constants. Time constants that are related to the “hard-wired" part of signal pro-
cessing within the model represent a lower limit of temporal acuity. (The term
“hard-wired" is used in the sense that this part of signal processing is assumed
to be independent of the specific experimental task.) The modulation filterbank
represents a set of time constants that are, however, too short to account for
78 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
the integration data. Thus, it is the decision device that inherently accounts
for the long effective time constants. This agrees well with the considerations
by Viemeister and Wakefield (1991) that different strategies are probably being
employed, and different capabilities tapped, in resolution and integration tasks.
The resolution task seems to use more “peripheral" processes whereas tempo-
ral integration may require higher-level processes such as multiple sampling and
probability summation. To that extent, assuming that the decision process oc-
curs at a higher level of auditory processing, there is a strong correspondence
between the modeling strategy of the present model and that suggested in the
“multiple-look" model.
This correspondence is supported by the model predictions for the experiment
of Viemeister and Wakefield, which are shown in the right panel of Fig. 3.17. Our
model predicts a 3-dB decrease in threshold for the pulse pair compared to the
threshold for a single pulse. Such a result is expected if the psychometric function
for detection of pure tones in noise and in quiet can be described by: d0 = m( E
N0
)k,
where d0 is the normalized sensitivity index, E is signal power, N0 is the spectral
noise power density and k and m represent “individual" parameters. For ideal
observers, the parameter k has the value 0.5 (cf. Green and Swets, 1966), leading
to a 3-dB decrease in threshold for the pulse pair compared to that for a single
pulse. According to Egan et al. (1969), the psychometric function for normal
hearing subjects can be described more accurately with a value k π 1 instead of
0:5. Such a value would lead to a 1.5-dB instead of 3-dB lower threshold for the
pulse pair than for a single pulse, as was discussed by Viemeister and Wakefield
(1991).
Long “effective" time constants occur both in typical test-tone integration
and in the modulation integration examined in the present study. Whereas the
decision device is responsible for the shift of the TMTF with changing signal
duration, from which an integration time constant can be derived, it is the scaling
of the modulation filterbank that determines the form of the TMTF, from which
a resolution time constant is commonly derived. As discussed in the section about
spectral integration in modulation detection, the threshold is determined mainly
by the portion of the modulation power of the broadband noise carrier that is
processed by the modulation filters tuned to the signal modulation frequency.
3.5.3 Future extensions of the model
Generally, all predicted thresholds shown in this paper lie between 2 and 5 dB
lower than the experimental data. This shift indicates that there must be a
certain loss of information in the auditory processing of modulation (independent
of modulation rate) that is not at present accounted for in the model. Further
modeling efforts are required to understand this discrepancy, that can not be
explained by simply increasing the variance of the internal noise, since thresholds
are mainly determined by the external statistics of the stimuli.
3.5 Discussion 79
The present model does not cover conditions which require some processes
of across-channel comparison. Such across-critical-band processing of temporally
modulated complex stimuli might occur in, for instance, comodulation masking
release (CMR) (Hall, 1987), comodulation detection difference (CDD) (McFad-
den, 1987; Cohen and Schubert, 1987), and modulation detection interference
(MDI) (Yost and Sheft, 1989). In these cases the auditory system seems to be
looking across frequency channels that contain temporally modulated stimuli.
In order to predict performance for these types of experiments (as well as bin-
aural masking experiments), additional stages have to be included that calculate,
for instance, the correlation between the envelopes of different frequency regions
(or the two ears). Such stages have not been systematically evaluated within the
framework of this study (for a first result on binaural masking, see Holube et al.,
1995a,b). However, using the present model as a preprocessing circuit, it might
be easier to find realistic across-channel processing stages that also allow correct
prediction for conditions in which across-channel processing is not needed.
80 Chapter 3: Spectral and temporal integration in modulation detection
3.6 Conclusions
The multi-channel modulation-filterbank model described in this study can pre-
dict a wide variety of experimental conditions, including spectral and temporal
integration of modulation detection and modulation masking with broadband
carriers.
ε Spectral integration is accounted for by combining the independent detec-
tion cues from all auditory filters with an optimal decision statistic.
ε Temporal integration is accounted for by the variable length of the template
that forms the basis of the optimal detector incorporated in the model.
ε The combination of the modulation filterbank concept and the optimal
decision algorithm presents a powerful strategy for describing modulation
detection phenomena in narrowband and broadband conditions.
Chapter 4
Amplitude modulation detection
with sinusoidal carriers at
different frequencies1
Abstract
For a set of carrier frequencies (2, 3, 4, 5, 9 kHz), the temporal modulation
transfer function (TMTF) was measured in the range of modulation frequencies
from 10{800 Hz. These conditions include the range of modulation frequencies
in which the cue for modulation detection changes from a temporal (at low mod-
ulation rates) to a spectral (at higher rates) cue. The data of all subjects show
a flat threshold function up to 100 Hz, independent of the carrier frequency. For
modulation rates larger than 100 Hz, detection thresholds increase at a rate of
about 2-5 dB/oct., depending on center frequency, and finally decrease when the
detection cue changes to detection of the spectral sidebands of the modulation.
The flat threshold function up to a modulation of about 100 Hz contradicts the
hypothesis of a modulation lowpass filter at about 50-60 Hz as often discussed in
the literature.
Results from simulations obtained with the modulation filterbank model were
compared with the data. The model which has successfully been applied to
modulation detection conditions with narrowband and broadband noise carriers,
accounts for the flat threshold up to a modulationrate of 100 Hz and also accounts
for the frequency-dependent roll-off in the threshold function.
However, the model does not account for the increase of experimental thresh-
olds for modulation rates above 100 Hz (for high center frequencies). A certain
loss of information seems to occur in the “central" auditory processing of high
1Parts of this chapter are presented in a paper in preparation for J. Acoust. Soc. Am. ,
written by Ralf Fassel, Armin Kohlrausch and me, with the title “The influence of carrier level
and frequency on modulation and beat-detection thresholds for sinusoidal carriers."
81
82 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
modulationrates which is not included in the present model. Further experiments
and modeling efforts are required to clarify the processing of fast modulations
(> 100 Hz) in the auditory system.
4.1 Introduction 83
4.1 Introduction
The sensitivity of the human auditory system to periodic amplitude variations has
been tested for different carrier types. The most common carrier is a broadband
noise (Viemeister, 1979). Using noise as a carrier has the advantage that only
temporal cues can be exploited by the subjects, because spectral cues associated
with the sidebands produced by the modulation fall within the carrier and are
therefore masked. It is assumed that in general short-term spectral cues are not
being used by the subject (Viemeister, 1979; Burns and Viemeister, 1981). The
disadvantage is, of course, that these experiments cannot reveal the influence
of the carrier frequency on modulation sensitivity. In order to investigate this
influence, the carrier can be a narrowband noise or a sinusoid. The experiments
and model simulations discussed in this chapter deal with the latter paradigm.
Previous experiments with sinusoidal carriers have revealed the following re-
sults (Zwicker, 1952; Viemeister, 1979): From very low modulation frequencies,
detection thresholds decrease slightly, reaching a minimum around 4 Hz, increase
with increasing modulation frequency and finally decrease as soon as the detec-
tion cue changes to detection of the spectral sidebands of the modulation(Zwicker
and Fastl, 1990). For example, for a 1-kHz carrier at 50 dB SPL, thresholds de-
crease from 1{4 Hz, followed by a 3 dB/oct. increase up to modulation frequen-
cies of approximately 60 Hz (Zwicker and Fastl, 1990; Viemeister, 1979). The
frequency at the maximum of the increasing part in the temporal modulation
transfer function, (TMTF) as well as its threshold value, increase with increasing
carrier frequency. The roll-off above the maximum is assumed to be caused by
the audibility of sidebands, so that one listens for additional tones, whereas for
lower modulation frequencies temporal attributes like fluctuations in loudness or
roughness are perceived (e.g., Sek and Moore, 1994).
An apparent problem in analyzing modulation detection thresholds for sinu-
soidal carriers is the possibility of off-frequency listening. It has been argued
that, even below the modulation frequency at which the sidebands are resolved,
the observer might increase the effective modulation depth by positioning his/her
internal filter away from the carrier frequency in such a way that the amplitudes
of the carrier and one of the sidebands are less different (e.g., Viemeister, 1979).
However, no model calculations have been published so far that allow estimation
of the quantitative influence of off-frequency listening on the audibility of high
modulation frequencies.
The present study examines amplitude modulation detection for a set of car-
rier frequencies (at 2, 3, 4, 5, and 9 kHz) for modulation frequencies in the range
from 10 to 800 Hz. The study is mainly concerned with the following question:
Is the modulation filterbank model, which has so far been successfully tested
in conditions with random-noise maskers, also able to account for modulation
detection data with sinusoidal carriers, and, apart from the question of the ap-
propriate “effective" signal processing along the auditory pathway, what is the
84 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
detection strategy used in modulation detection? The goal is to describe the
TMTF's in terms of frequency selectivity in both the audio-frequency domain
and the modulation-frequency domain.
4.2 Method 85
4.2 Method
4.2.1 Procedure and Subjects
Amplitude modulation thresholds for sinusoidal carriers were measured and sim-
ulated using an adaptive 3-Interval Forced-choice (3IFC) procedure. The unmod-
ulated carrier was presented in two of three consecutive intervals separated by
silent intervals of 300 ms. In the third, randomly chosen interval the carrier was
sinusoidally modulated. The subject's task was to specify the interval contain-
ing the test modulation. During a threshold run, the modulation depth in dB
(20logm), was adjusted by a 2-down 1-up algorithm (Levitt, 1971) which pro-
vides an estimate of the modulation depth necessary for 70.7% correct responses.
The step size was 4 dB at the start of a run and was divided by 2 after every
two reversals of the signal level until the step size reached a minimum of 1 dB,
at which time it was fixed. Using this 1-dB step size, ten reversals were obtained
and the median value of the signal levels at these 10 reversals was used as the
threshold value. The subjects received visual feedback during the measurements.
The procedure was repeated four times for each signal configuration and subject.
All figures show the median and interquartile ranges based on four single mea-
surements. All five subjects had experience in psychoacoustic measurements and
had normal hearing. They were between 23 and 29 years old.
4.2.2 Apparatus and stimuli
All acoustic stimuli were digitally generated at a sampling frequency of 30 kHz.
The stimuli were transformed to analog signals with a two-channel 16-bit D/A
converter, attenuated, lowpass filtered at 10 kHz and diotically presented via
headphones (HDA 200) in a soundproof booth. Signal generation and presen-
tation were controlled by a SUN-Workstation using a signal-processing software
package developed at the psychoacoustic laboratory in Göttingen.
Several experiments on modulation detection were performed. Amplitude
modulation thresholds for sinusoidal carriers were measured for modulation rates
in the range from 10-800 Hz. The duration of the carrier was 800 ms with 150-ms
Hanning ramps. The amplitude modulation occurred in the 500 ms constant part
of the carrier and was windowed with a Hanning window over its total duration.
The level of the stimuli was 65 dB SPL.
86 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
4.3 Experimental results and model predictions
4.3.1 Amplitude modulation detection thresholds for a
carrier frequency of 5 kHz
There is an “artificial" upper limit in determining the TMTF, which is imposed
by the resolution of the sidebands. The influence of this limitation can be re-
duced by using high carrier frequencies, because at high frequencies, the auditory-
filter bandwidth is large. Therefore, to allow predictions about temporal process-
ing over a relatively wide range of modulation frequencies, the first experiment
deals with modulation detection using a carrier with a high frequency (5 kHz).
Figure 4.1 shows modulation detection thresholds as a function of modulation fre-
-35
-30
-25
-20
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 4.1: Modulation detection thresholds of sinusoidal amplitude modulation
as a function of modulation frequency. The carrier was a sinusoid at 5 kHz.
Carrier duration: 800 ms; Modulation duration: 500 ms; Level: 65 dB SPL.
Subjects: JV (4), PD (2), TD (δ).
quency for three subjects. The threshold functions exhibit three different charac-
teristic regions. In the range from 10{100 Hz all subjects show a more or less flat
threshold function. The threshold values differ from m = 27 to 31 dB across
subjects. In the range from 100{400 Hz threshold increases at approximately
4.3 Experimental results and model predictions 87
3-4 dB/oct. Finally, for modulation frequencies larger than 400 Hz a roll-off in
the threshold function can be observed; the detection threshold decreases.
The observed threshold function differs from the results of Zwicker (1952).
His data show an increase of the threshold values for modulation frequencies
above 10 Hz. On the other hand, the results agree quite well with more recent
data from Fleischer (1982) and Fassel (1994). Both studies showed modulation
thresholds for a 5-kHz sinusoidal carrier to be flat up to modulation frequencies
of 100 to 130 Hz. The data of Fassel also show that the same result is obtained
at a carrier frequency of 10 kHz. This flat threshold function up to a modulation
frequency of 100 Hz contradicts the hypothesis of a modulation lowpass filter in
the auditory pathway with a fixed cut-off frequency at about 64 Hz as discussed
in the literature (e.g., Viemeister, 1979). If one wishes to keep the hypothesis of
such a lowpass filter, its cut-off frequency would have to be at about 150-200 Hz
at this carrier frequency.
4.3.2 Comparison of sideband detection and amplitude
modulation detection data
A tone-on-tone masking experiment was performed to investigate the extent to
which each sideband of the modulated signal contributes to the modulation de-
tection threshold. The (masked) thresholds of the lower and the upper sideband
were measured separately in the presence of the carrier as masker (cf. Sek and
Moore, 1994). Measurement were performed as a function of the spectral distance
Δf between the sideband and the carrier.
Figure 4.2 shows data for three subjects. The two upper panels and the lower
left panel of the figure show individual data and the lower right panel shows the
averaged data of all subjects. The ordinate indicates signal level at threshold
and the abscissa represents Δf. In addition, modulation detection thresholds
are included in each panel. Modulation depth at threshold was transformed into
signal level per sideband. In the case of the modulation detection condition, the
abscissa indicates modulation frequency.
Several interesting effects can be observed in the data. First, for the largest
measured spectral distance of 800 Hz, the threshold for the lower sideband for
all subjects equals the modulation detection threshold at 800 Hz. This indicates
that, at such a high modulation frequency, modulation detection threshold is
determined by the masked threshold of the spectrally resolved lower sideband.
Second, in the range from 10{100 Hz spectral distance between sideband and
carrier, the masked threshold for both the upper and the lower sidebands is almost
the same. This result suggests that in the modulation detection condition where
both sidebands are presented simultaneously and with equal level, the sidebands
are weighted equally by the auditory system. Third, in this range from 10{
100 Hz, thresholds for single sideband detection are almost exactly 6-dB higher
88 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
25
30
35
40
45
10 100 1000
Level [dB SPL]
TD
25
30
35
40
45
10 100 1000
Level [dB SPL]
f [Hz]
PD
PD
PD
PD
25
30
35
40
45
10 100 1000
JV
25
30
35
40
45
10 100 1000
∆ f [Hz]
MEAN
Figure 4.2: Masked thresholds of a sinusoidal test signal as a function of the
spectral distance Δf to the 5-kHz masker. Δf was chosen according to the
parameter fmod in the modulation detection condition (Fig. 4.1). The figure
represents the threshold for the lower sideband (5) and the upper sideband (4)
alone in the presence of the carrier. Masker Level: 65 dB SPL; Masker and
test-signal duration: 500 ms. In addition, the modulation detection data from
Fig. 4.1 are replotted, where modulation threshold values are transformed into
level per sideband (δ). Subjects: TD (upper left), JV (upper right), PD (lower
left), averaged data (lower right).
4.3 Experimental results and model predictions 89
than the corresponding modulation detection thresholds. If the two sidebands
were processed independently in the modulation detection condition (i.e., they
were uncorrelated), one would predict a 3-dB difference instead of the observed
6 dB difference (e.g., Green, 1967). The 6-dB difference thus indicates that in
the modulation detection task, the upper and lower sideband are not processed
independently.2 For a direct comparison between single-sideband detection and
amplitude-modulation detection, one also has to pay attention to differences in
envelope shape between the two conditions. This difference is very pronounced, if
one compares the envelopes of a perfect-beat condition (two sinusoids with equal
amplitude) and a fully amplitude modulated (m=1) stimulus. This difference,
however, is quite small for modulation depths near threshold and does not play
a major role in these conditions. On the basis of these experimental results it
can be assumed that for modulation frequencies up to 100 Hz both sidebands are
processed within one peripheral channel which is centered at or near the carrier
frequency.
An interesting aspect, for which so far no explanation can be given, is the
result for the lower sideband between 100 and 300 Hz spectral distance. Phe-
nomenologically, the threshold curve runs parallel to the TMTF curve. This
suggests that the detection of the lower sideband is governed by the same cues
as in the case of the TMTF. In contrast to the typical asymmetry between lower
and upper sideband thresholds at large spectral distances (e.g., 800 Hz), in this
region the threshold for the lower sideband is higher than that for the upper
sideband. One might expect that a combined investigation of lower-sideband
audibility and TMTF for sinusoidal carriers will help to better understand the
involved mechanism. Such an investigation is, however, beyond the scope of the
present study.
4.3.3 Simulations on the basis of the modulation filter-
bank model
The question remains why modulation detection thresholds increase in the range
from 100 to 400 Hz modulation frequency. A possibility is that above 100 Hz
the sidebands are increasingly attenuated by the transfer function of the auditory
filter (centered at 5 kHz), and that between 100 and 500 Hz modulation frequency
the spectral resolution of the auditory system is not good enough to determine the
thresholds while modulation depth is already effectively reduced. This question
will be addressed in the following two sections.
In the previous chapters a modulation filterbank model was developed, which
comprises resonance filters with center frequencies in the range 0{1000Hz. Within
2Two functions g(t) and f(t) are uncorrelated if the integrated cross product is zero, i.e.,
+1
R
1
g(t)f(t)dt = 0. When this is the case,
+1
R
1
[g(t) + f(t)]2dt =
+1
R
1
g(t)2dt +
+1
R
1
f(t)2dt.
90 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
-36
-34
-32
-30
-28
-26
-24
-22
-20
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 4.3: Modulation detection thresholds for sinusoidal amplitude modulation
as a function of the modulation frequency. The carrier was a sinusoid at 5 kHz.
The open circles represent averaged data of three subjects (from Fig. 4.1). Simu-
lations are indicated by the filled symbols: The modulation analysis was carried
out within the peripheral channel tuned to the carrier frequency (ε) and that
tuned to the lower sideband ([?4]), respectively.
the range 0{100 Hz, the bandwidths of the modulation filters have been deter-
mined such that the model accounts for modulation detection data with narrow-
band noise carriers. To account for the increase in threshold with a rate of 3 dB
per octave of modulation frequency, which is seen in the data with broadband
noise carriers, a logarithmic scaling of the modulation filter bandwidth has been
chosen: all filters with a center frequency above 10 Hz have a constant Q-value
of 2.
The model was developed as a multi-channel model, where modulation filter-
ing was performed across frequency in every excited peripheral channel. In all
conditions described in the previous chapters, random noise carriers were used so
that it was reasonable to assume independent observations across frequency and
an increase in information about the signal modulation with increasing number
of stimulated auditory channels. The situation is different for a sinusoidal carrier.
The limiting factor in this case is the internal noise that, in the present model
version, is added as independent noise to the output of all modulation filters in all
4.3 Experimental results and model predictions 91
peripheral filters. An amplitude-modulated sinusoid generates a coherent mod-
ulation pattern in a range of auditory channels. The number of these channels
increases with increasing carrier level. Since each peripheral channel contains
independent internal noise, one can expect a decrease in modulation threshold
with increasing carrier level. In this view, the level of a sinusoidal carrier in-
fluences modulation thresholds in a similar way as that for the bandwidth for a
noise carrier. As long as the carrier level is fixed, the only difference between a
single-channel and a multi-channel analysis is the absolute value of the predicted
modulation threshold. It therefore does not seem necessary to apply a broadband
analysis to understand the shape of MTFs for sinusoidal carriers. Nevertheless,
it is reasonable to make some simple assumptions about the processing of mod-
ulation with sinusoidal carriers which can be accounted for by a single-channel
model.
Figure 4.3 shows simulations (filled circles) on the basis of the modulation
filterbank model where the modulation analysis was first carried out using the
peripheral filter tuned to the carrier frequency of 5 kHz. The simulated threshold
remains flat in the range from 10{100 Hz, increases slightly in the range from 100{
300 Hz and strongly increases for higher modulation frequencies. In the region
10{100 Hz the simulated thresholds agree very well with the averaged data of all
subjects which are indicated by the open symbols. In the range from 100{300 Hz,
however, the model predicts a weaker increase in the TMTF than observed in the
data. With further increase in modulation frequency, the transfer function of
the peripheral filter at 5 kHz further attenuates the sidebands of the modulated
signal. Therefore, the model predicts an increase in modulation threshold. This
is in contrast to the data. As long as the modulation analysis is only performed
as a single-channel analysis using a filter centered at the carrier frequency, there
is no possibility of accounting for “off-frequency" listening. This may, however,
be done by the subjects, at least in conditions in which the sidebands can be
spectrally resolved by the system. In such a case, the detection strategy of the
subject probably is to monitor one or both auditory filters that are centered near
the sidebands of the modulation. For the detection of low modulation frequencies
up to 100 Hz, it can be assumed either that no off-frequency occurs or that off-
frequency listening is not advantageous for the subject.
A more appropriate decision strategy is required to account for the roll-off in
the threshold function for fmod
≥ 400 Hz. Based on the results from Sect. 4.3.2,
it is assumed in the following that the modulation analysis is carried out using
a filter centered on the lower sideband. This is motivated by the finding that
the modulation threshold for fmod = 800 Hz equals the masked threshold of the
lower sideband of the signal (see Fig. 4.2).3 The filled squares in Fig. 4.3 show
the corresponding simulations. The simulated threshold remains almost flat up
3This does not necessarily mean that the same detection strategy is used by the subjects in
these two stimulus conditions. Instead, also in the sideband-detection condition the decision
is probably based on off-frequency listening with a maximal signal-to-noise ratio at a lower
92 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
to a modulation frequency of 400 Hz, decreases slightly for fmod = 500 Hz and
predicts the detection threshold for the largest modulation frequency of 800 Hz
very well. But, in contrast to the data, there is no increasing part in the threshold
function in the range between 100{300 Hz.
4.3.4 TMTFs for different carrier frequencies
To examine the influence of peripheral filtering on modulation detection thresh-
old, additional TMTFs were measured for a set of carrier frequencies. Figure 4.4
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
TD
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
PD
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
10 100 1000
JV
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
10 100 1000
Modulation frequency [Hz]
MODEL
Figure 4.4: TMTFs for carrier frequencies of 2 kHz (4), 3 kHz (3), 4 kHz (5),
5 kHz (δ) and 9 kHz (open pentagons). Subjects: TD (upper left), JV (upper
right), PD (lower left). Simulated thresholds using the the modulation filterbank
model are shown in the lower right panel. The modulation analysis was carried
out within the peripheral channel tuned to the lower sideband.
frequency (e.g., Moore, 1986). However, it appears reasonable to assume that in the modulation
detection condition thresholds can be estimated by monitoring the filter at the lower sideband.
4.3 Experimental results and model predictions 93
shows measured and simulated TMTFs for the carrier frequencies of 2, 3, 4, 5
and 9 kHz. The upper two panels and the lower left panel show individual data
of three subjects and the lower right panel shows simulations on the basis of
the modulation filterbank model where the modulation analysis was performed
within the peripheral channel tuned to the lower sideband.
The model accounts for the flat threshold in the range from 10{100 Hz and
also accounts for the frequency-dependent roll-off in the TMTF's indicating that,
for these regions of modulation frequencies, appropriate detection strategies have
been used. However, as already discussed above, the model does not account for
the increase in threshold between 100 Hz and the roll-off which can be observed
in the experimental data.
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 4.5: Individual modulation detection thresholds for sinusoidal amplitude
modulation as a function of modulation frequency for the carrier frequencies
4 kHz (5), 5 kHz (δ) and 9 kHz (open pentagons). Subject: TD.
To illustrate the increase in threshold in the measured data, Fig. 4.5 shows
the individual data of one subject (TD) with a different scale on the ordinate. In
this plot, only the results for the three highest carrier frequencies (4, 5, 9 kHz)
are shown. At a carrier frequency of 9 kHz, for example, the thresholds increase
by about 8{10 dB in the range from 100{500 Hz. Fassel and Püschel (1993) and
Fassel (1994) reported very similar results for a carrier frequency of 10 kHz.
94 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
If the increasing part of the measured TMTF is determined by peripheral
filtering, the frequency at which thresholds increase should depend on the carrier
frequency because the bandwidth of the peripheral filter increases with increas-
ing center frequency. In particular, thresholds should remain flat up to a higher
modulation frequency for the 9-kHz carrier than for 5-kHz carrier. This, how-
ever, is not the case. The increasing part of the TMTF's between 100 and 200 Hz
is virtually identical for carriers of 5 kHz and 9 kHz. As expected, at a car-
rier frequency of 9 kHz, the roll-off in the threshold function occurs at a higher
modulation frequency compared to that for the 5 kHz carrier.
4.4 Discussion 95
4.4 Discussion
The present model is able to account well for the roll-offin the data for the highest
modulation frequencies. The detection strategy of monitoring the activity in the
peripheral filter tuned to the lower sideband seems to be an appropriate approach.
Within the model, there are two effects which determine the slope of the
roll-off in the simulated TMTF. The first effect is that, in the filter centered
on the lower sideband (holding the level of the sideband constant), the effec-
tive modulation depth increases with increasing spectral distance between the
lower sideband and the carrier. If we further assume that modulations up to
about 1000 Hz are transformed without attenuation within the processing by
the modulation filterbank, modulation detection thresholds will decrease for high
modulation frequencies. This predicted decrease in threshold is, however, not in
line with the common interpretation and observation that the lower sideband can
be spectrally resolved at a sufficiently high modulation rate.
mod
0.2
0.1
0.0
MCF [Hz]
10
1000
f = 400 Hz
Time [s]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Amplitude [MU]
MCF [Hz]
10
1000
f = 800 Hz
Time [s]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Amplitude[MU]
0.1
0.15
0.0
mod
0.05
MCF [Hz]
10
1000
f = 500 Hz
Time [s]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Amplitude [MU]
0.1
0.2
0.0
mod
MCF [Hz]
10
1000
Time [s]
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
Amplitude [MU]
0.1
0.0
f = 1600 Hz
mod
Figure 4.6: Template-representations for four different stimulus conditions at a
carrier frequency of 5 kHz. The z-axis represents modulation center frequency
(MCF) of the modulation filters. Upper left: fmod = 400 Hz, upper right: fmod =
500 Hz, lower left: fmod = 800 Hz, lower right: fmod = 1600 Hz.
There is a second effect which determines the threshold in conditions where
the sideband is clearly spectrally separated by the system. In such conditions,
thresholds are mainly determined by the dc-component of the modulation spec-
trum, which corresponds to the energy within the auditory filter. This is illus-
96 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
trated in Fig. 4.6. It shows derived templates for the modulation rates of 400 Hz
(upper left), 500 Hz (upper right), 800 Hz (lower left) and 1600 Hz (lower right)
using a carrier frequency of 5 kHz. With increasing fmod there is a systematic
shift of the “excitation" from a highly activated modulation filter centered at
400 Hz towards an activated dc-part in case of 1600 Hz. Thus, the simulated
threshold depends on the processing of fast modulations up to 800 Hz, whereas
at 1600 Hz and higher modulation rates threshold is determined by the excitation
of the modulation filter tuned to the lowest modulation frequencies (including the
dc-component).
However, the model does not account for all aspects of the data obtained with
sinusoidal carriers. For high carrier frequencies, experimental thresholds increase
for modulation rates above about 100 Hz, whereas the model predicts nearly
constant thresholds. A certain loss of information seems to occur in the auditory
processing of high modulation rates which is not included in the present model.
Given that the cut-off frequency of around 100 Hz remains constant with center
frequency, it can be concluded that the increase in threshold for fmod > 100 Hz
is not determined by the modulation transfer characteristic of the auditory filter,
but that its source has to be at a higher stage of processing.
-16
-14
-12
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
Attenuation [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
-32
-31
-30
-29
-28
-27
-26
-25
-24
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 4.7: Left panel: Modified modulation filterbank model in which it is as-
sumed that the modulation filter tuned to 100 Hz represents the highest available
modulation filter. Right panel: Corresponding simulation of the TMTF for a car-
rier frequency of 5 kHz. The modulation analysis was performed in the peripheral
filter tuned to the lower sideband of the modulated tone.
If one wants to keep the general structure of the present model, it is neces-
sary to change its processing of modulation rates higher than 100 Hz. In the
following section, two possible alternatives and their predictions are described.
The first approach is to restrict the range of available modulation filters to center
4.4 Discussion 97
frequencies up to 100 Hz. In this case, modulation rates above 100 Hz are atten-
uated by the upper skirt of the 100 Hz modulation filter. The processing of lower
modulation rates is assumed to be the same as in the “original" model. Such an
approach might be interpreted as an analog in the modulation frequency domain
to the “end of cochlea" hypothesis in the periphery (Buus et al., 1986; Zhou,
1995), which states that there is no cochlea filter tuned to the highest audiomet-
ric frequencies - the highest available cochlea filter is assumed to be tuned in the
range of 14-18 kHz, dependent on the subject. Within the modified modulation
filterbank model the transfer characteristic of the highest modulation filter would
exhibit an asymmetric shape. The modulation filters of the original model have
a slope which is too steep to account for the increase of only about 3-dB/oct. in
the measured TMTF. Instead, a shallower slope of the upper skirt (of 6 dB/oct.)
of the 100 Hz modulation-filter-transfer function was chosen in order to account
for the increase in the measured TMTF. Such a modified modulation filterbank
model would also account for the 3 dB increase in threshold for fmod > 100 Hz in
conditions using broadband noise as the carrier. For a noise carrier, the increase
in threshold would then be caused in this alternative model by an attenuation of
the signal modulation and not any more by the logarithmic scaling of the mod-
ulation filter bandwidth. For high modulation frequencies, the modified model
version therefore acts as a lowpass filtering stage, with an effective “lowpass cutoff
frequency" of about 150 Hz.
The left panel of Fig. 4.7 shows the transfer characteristics of the modified
modulation filterbank just described. The right panel of the figure shows, as an
example, the simulated TMTF for a sinusoidal carrier of 5 kHz on the basis of
this model. The simulated thresholds in the range from 100{400 Hz increase by
almost 5 dB which agrees well with the data. The threshold decreases slightly
for higher modulation rates. The roll-off in the threshold function is weaker
than that observed in the data (see Figs. 4.1 and 4.4). The roll off within the
modified model happens as a consequence of the attenuation of fast modulations
by the 100-Hz modulation filter. For higher modulation rates, when the energy
of the spectrally resolved sideband determines the threshold, the TMTF equals
that obtained with the original model (not shown). The discrepancy between
experiment and simulation at these high modulation frequencies suggests that
the peripheral frequency selectivity is not well modeled by the gamma-tone filter
bank. As an example, the gamma-tone filter has a symmetric transfer charac-
teristic on a linear frequency scale. Thus, for very high modulation frequencies,
the gammatone filter predicts equal detectability of the lower and the upper side
component, in contrast to the results in Fig. 4.2. From model simulations by
van der Heijden and Kohlrausch (1994, Hear. Res. 80, 38{52, e.g. Figs. 5 and
7) one can conclude that the gammatone filter considerably underestimates the
audibility of the lower side component. Thus, the failure of the present model to
correctly predict thresholds at the highest modulation frequencies is most likely
caused by the peripheral filter stage.
98 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
To preserve the idea of resonance filters for the processing of modulations
higher than 100 Hz, a second approach is to introduce a different nonlinearity
at the output of these modulation filters. So far, the (Hilbert-) envelopes of the
representations at the outputs of the modulations filters were computed. This
results in a constant amount of energy of the signal modulation for all modulation
frequencies at the corresponding modulation filter output. In order to introduce a
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
-35
-30
-25
-20
-15
10 100 1000
Modulation depth m [dB]
Modulation frequency [Hz]
Figure 4.8: Simulated modulation detection thresholds using a modified modu-
lation filterbank model in which the output of the modulation filters with center
frequencies higher than 100 Hz is halfwave rectified and lowpass filtered at 100 Hz
(instead of calculating the Hilbert envelope). Parameters as in Fig. 4.4. Left:
whole dynamic range of the simulated data; right: simulated thresholds for a re-
duced dynamic range to better illustrate the increase in threshold for modulation
frequencies larger than 100 Hz (only the data for 4, 5, 9 kHz carrier frequency
are shown).
modulation-frequency-dependent information loss, the following modification was
tested: instead of calculating the Hilbert envelope, the output of all modulation
filters with center frequencies above 100 Hz are half-wave rectified and low-pass
filtered at 100 Hz. Assuming the same filter characteristics of the modulation
filters as in the original model, such a processing smoothes the internal represen-
tation at the filter output, and, as a consequence, should lead to an increase in
threshold with increasing modulation frequency for fmod > 100 Hz.
Such an approach is quite different to a processing by a lowpass filtering (with-
out any prior filtering by a modulation filterbank) where the signal modulation
itself would be attenuated according to the transfer function of the lowpass filter.
Instead, the fluctuations at the output of the modulation filter are smoothed
according to the characteristics of the lowpass filter.
Figure 4.8 shows simulated TMTFs for the carrier frequencies 2, 3, 4, 5, and
9 kHz on the basis of the modified modulation filterbank model just described.
The thresholds agree very well with the data from Fig. 4.4. The model accounts
4.4 Discussion 99
for the increasing part of the TMTFs for fmod > 100 Hz as well as for the roll-off
in the threshold functions.
100 Chapter 4: Amplitude modulation detection with sinusoidal carriers
4.5 Conclusions
In this chapter, the modulation filterbank model, whose parameters had been
previously determined in conditions with narrowband noise as the carrier, was
tested by measuring modulation detection thresholds for sinusoidal carriers for a
range of carrier frequencies.
The model accounts for the flat TMTF up to a modulation frequency of about
100 Hz, independent of the carrier frequency. It also accounts for the threshold
of the spectrally resolved sidebands, if the modulation analysis is performed in
the peripheral channel tuned to the lower sideband.
The model is not able to describe the increase in threshold observed in the
range of modulation frequencies from 100{300 Hz for carrier frequencies larger
than 3 kHz, for which the sidebands are not yet spectrally resolved. Therefore,
there seems to be a different processing mechanism for modulation frequencies
above 100 Hz.
To model the increase in threshold two alternative modeling approaches were
discussed. The first approach included a change in the scaling of the modulation
filters, and the second approach included a different nonlinearity after modulation
filtering. Further experiments are required to understand more completely the
processing of high-frequency modulation.
Chapter 5
Summary and conclusion
In this thesis a new modeling approach is developed which is able to predict
human performance in a variety of experimental conditions related to modulation
detection and modulation masking. The model structure builds on an earlier ver-
sion of a model of the “effective" signal processing in the auditory system (Dau,
1992; Dau et al., 1995a,b), which allows the prediction of masked thresholds in a
variety of simultaneous and non-simultaneous conditions. This “original" version
of the model, however, can not deal with conditions in which fast amplitude mod-
ulations have to be detected, because the final stage of preprocessing is modeled
by a lowpass filter with a cut-off frequency of 8 Hz. In the new version of the
model, evaluated here, the lowpass-filter stage is replaced by a modulation filter-
bank. This modification ensures a certain sensitivity for fast temporal envelope
fluctuations and enables the model to describe masking effects in the modulation
frequency domain.
The parameters of the modulation filterbank are adjusted to account for mod-
ulation detection and modulation masking data with narrowband carriers at a
high carrier center frequency. As the bandwidths of these modulated stimuli are
smaller than the bandwidth of the stimulated peripheral filter, spectral cues do
not play any role and the analysis can be restricted to one auditory filter. In this
single-channel version of the model, the parameters of the filterbank are divided
into two domains with different scaling: in the range 0-10 Hz, the filters have
a constant bandwidth of 5 Hz, with the lowest filter being a lowpass filter with
a cut-off frequency of 2.5 Hz. Between 10 and 1000 Hz a logarithmic scaling
with a constant Q-value of 2 is assumed. This leads to the following predictions:
For conditions in which the modulation frequency (fmod) is smaller than half
the bandwidth of the carrier (Δf), the model predicts an increase in modula-
tion thresholds with increasing modulation frequency. This predictions agrees
with the lowpass characteristic in the threshold functions, which is well known
from measurements of the temporal modulation transfer function (TMTF) in the
literature. Within the model this lowpass characteristic is caused by the loga-
rithmic scaling of the modulation filter bandwidth. Due to the increasing filter
101
102 Chapter 5: Summary and conclusion
bandwidth, the power of the intrinsic fluctuations of the noise carrier increases
with increasing center frequency of the filters. This increase leads to a threshold
increase of approximately 3 dB per doubling of the modulation frequency. In
conditions with fmod > Δf
2 , the model can account for the highpass characteristic
in the threshold function, reflecting the auditory system's frequency selectivity
for modulation. Again, the determining factor is the amount of the inherent
modulation power in the carrier falling within the passband of the modulation
filter tuned to the test modulation frequency.
In modulation detection conditions with carrier bandwidths larger than a
critical band, an extension of the single-channel model is required that allows
integration of signal information across frequency. For this purpose, the single-
channel model is extended to a multi-channel model that is able to describe
effects of spectral integration in amplitude modulation detection and masking.
The modulation analysis is performed in parallel within each excited peripheral
channel, where the parameters of the modulation filterbank are the same for all
auditory filters. In the detection stage of the multi-channel model, the outputs of
all modulation filters from all excited peripheral channels are combined linearly
and with optimal weights.
The model accounts for the findings that, (i), the “time constants" associated
with the temporal modulation transfer functions (TMTFs) for bandlimited noise
carriers do not vary with carrier center frequency and that, (ii), the time constants
associated with the TMTF's decrease monotonically with increasing carrier band-
width. The model also accounts for data of modulation masking with broadband
noise carriers. The predicted masking pattern produced by a narrowband noise
along the modulation frequency scale is in very good agreement with results of
Houtgast (1989).
With the multi-channel model, an interesting conclusion can be drawn for
conditions with stochastic noise carriers and a coherent deterministic amplitude
modulation. In such a condition, it is equivalent to detect the modulation of a
single noiseband at the output of one wide peripheral filter or to combine the
modulation information across an array of bandpass-filtered uncorrelated noises.
Thus, for a broadband noise carrier, it is not possible to discriminate between
a predetection-filter approach such as proposed by Viemeister (1979) and the
approach of linearly combining independent channels as realized in the present
model. However, the bandwidth of the predetection filter of the Viemeister model
is larger than the critical band estimates for almost all of the auditory range.
Such an approach therefore fails to describe masking data in conditions in which
spectral resolution of the auditory system plays any role. The present model
seems to give a much more general description of the processing of modulation
in the auditory system and, at the same time, does not contradict our knowledge
of spectral masking.
To integrate information across time, a “multiple-look" strategy is realized
within the detection stage of both the single-channel and the multi-channelmodel.
103
This strategy allows the model to account for long time constants derived from
the data on modulation integration without introducing true long-term integra-
tion. Instead, the long “effective" time constants result from the combination of
information from different “looks" via multiple sampling and probability summa-
tion.
In modulation detection experiments with deterministic carriers (such as si-
nusoids), the limiting factor for detecting modulation within the model is the
internal noise that is added as independent noise to the output of all modulation
filters in all peripheral filters. In addition, as a further important difference to
the conditions with broadband random noise carriers, the shape of the peripheral
filters plays a major role in stimulus conditions where the detection is based on
the “audibility" of the spectral sidebands of the modulation. The multi-channel
model can account for the observed flat modulation detection thresholds up to a
modulation rate of about 100 Hz and also for the frequency-dependent roll-off in
the threshold function observed in the data for a set of carrier frequencies in the
range from 2{9 kHz. However, there are open questions related to the processing
of modulations above 100 Hz (for high center frequencies). It appears necessary
here to introduce a further loss of information at high modulation rates.
The present model could also be used as a preprocessing circuit for describing
experiments which exhibit some kind of across-critical-band interaction of mod-
ulation components (e.g., Hall, 1987; Yost and Sheft, 1989). In order to predict
performance for these types of experiments, additional stages would have to be
included that calculate, for example, the correlation between the envelopes of
different frequency regions.
Appendix A
Contributions from Signal
detection theory (SDT)
Idea of the “optimal detector"
Signal detection theory (Green and Swets, 1966) is especially concerned with
decision rules and is closely connected with statistical decision theory. In the
following section the fundamental ideas of optimal detection processing will be
discussed.
A.1 Formal discussion of the decision problem
Let us first imagine a typical psychoacoustical observation task. In a single
observation interval an acoustical stimulus is presented and one of two possible
stimulus alternatives is realized. These alternatives are denoted S and N and are
also called hypotheses:
S : During the observation interval a signal is added to noise
(“signal interval").
N : During the non-signal interval only noise is presented
(“noise interval").
These different “states of the world" S or N produce specific events, i.e.,specific
representations of the acoustical stimulus in the auditory system. A fixed stimu-
lus does not always cause the same event e; rather the events are distributed. The
probability of an event e, given that S has occurred, is denoted by P(ejS) and
the probability of the event e, given that N has occurred, is denoted by P(ejN).
Because both alternatives may lead to the same event it is generally impossible
to get definite information about the “state of the world" from the event.
104
A.1 Formal discussion of the decision problem 105
The observer's task is to make a decision, i.e., S or N, on the basis of the
event e. For this decision he needs a decision criterion. The value of this criterion
depends on the goal of the task.
To maximize the number of correct decisions, as an example, it is reasonable
to select that hypothesis which has the larger probability conditional on the given
event e. Therefore the decision S will be made if
P(Sje)
P(Nje)
> 1 : (A.1)
Generally these “a-posteriori probabilities" are not given directly. Instead, as-
sumptions about the distributions P(ejS) and P(ejN) are stated.
According to the Baye's Theorem the ratio of the a-posteriori probabilities of
two hypotheses S and N is given by :
P(Sje)
P(Nje) =
P(S) ΔP(ejS)
P(N) ΔP(ejN) (A.2)
The observer selects the hypothesis S if
P(ejS)
P(ejN)
| {z }
likelihood ratio
> P(N)
P(S) =: c (A.3)
This decision rule contains the quantity P(ejS)
P(ejN). It is called the likelihood ratio
and is denoted by l(e) (Green and Swets, 1966; Fischer, 1967). The decision
criterion is solely determined by the “a-priori" probabilities P(S) and P(N). 1
Of course, the application of such a decision rule does not lead to infallible
results. Basing decisions on probabilities implies the possibility of wrong deci-
sions. The decision criterion c divides the likelihood-ratio continuum (also called
decision axis) into two ranges dependent on the decision goal and motivation of
the observer. The probability of being correct concerning the hypothesis S can be
computed. It is the probability of the hypothesis S causing an event e that leads
to a likelihood ratio l = l(e) larger than the decision criterion c. This is denoted
by :
P(correct) = P(l > cjS) (A.4)
The decision rule l(e) > c can be substituted by another decision rule that is
monotonic with l, because only the scale will be transformed but the decisions
will remain the same. Then, the decision criterion must be transformed by the
same rule. 2
1Other strategies (for example minimizing the number of false decisions) lead to a different
decision criterion.
2For a strictly monotonic function f, l(e) > c can be replaced by f(l(e)) > f(c).
106 Appendix A: Contributions from Signal detection theory (SDT)
In general it can be shown (Green and Swets, 1966) that each decision rule
that is based on the likelihood ratio or another quantity which is monotonically
related to the likelihood ratio optimizes the decision maker's goal (for example
the number of correct decisions). This fact will be useful for later computations of
the likelihood ratio when specific assumptions about the underlying distributions
are made. To summarize, the optimal decision procedure is to compare a quantity
that is monotonically related to the likelihood ratio with an appropriate decision
criterion.
A.2 The decision problem in an mIFC task
To avoid the problem of determining an absolute decision criterion, investigators
often use an m-Interval Forced-Choice (mIFC) design for psychoacoustical ex-
periments. In forced-choice tasks more than one observation interval is used. In
the most general case, with m observation intervals, the signal is presented in
one - randomly selected - interval, so there are m 1 intervals with noise alone
and a single interval in which the signal is added to the noise. On the assump-
tion of uncorrelated intervals, the problem can be reduced to the description of
m independent single intervals. So it is assumed that the observer's decision is
determined by the likelihood ratios of the events ei, where the likelihood ratio is
computed in the following way:
l(ei) =
P(ei
jS)
P(ei
jN) (i = 1;:::;m) (A.5)
l(ei) has the same definition it had in the analysis of the single-observation pro-
cedure (see Eq. (A.3))
The observer's decision rule is to select the interval producing the largest likeli-
hood ratio and to associate it with the signal interval (Green and Swets, 1966).
Because this decision rule is based on the comparison of likelihoods it is possible
to avoid an absolute internal criterion used in the single-observation task. The
observer will be correct if the likelihood ratio associated with the signal-plus-
noise-distribution is actually larger than each likelihood ratio associated with the
noise-alone distributions. But of course the noise-alone distribution may produce
a larger ratio l, in which case the observer will make a wrong decision.
Consider an 2IFC task and let the sample of likelihood ratio from the signal
distribution be called ls and the sample from the noise distribution be called
ln. If ls = k, then the observer will be correct if ln < k. If the two samples
are independent, then for a given k the probability of a correct response in the
two-alternative forced-choice task is:
P2;k(correct) = P(ls = k) ΔP(ln < k) (A.6)
A.3 Gaussian assumption and the probability of correct decisions 107
The total probability of being correct is evaluated by integrating this expression
over all possible values of k :
P2(correct) =
+1
Z
1
[P(ls = k) ΔP(ln < k)] dk
=
+1
Z
1
[P(l = kjS) ΔP(l < kjN)] dk (A.7)
Extension of this argument to m intervals yields the probability of correct deci-
sions in an mIFC task :
Pm(correct) =
+1
Z
1
[P(ls = k) Δ(P(ln < k))m 1] dk
=
+1
Z
1
[P(l = kjS) Δ(P(l < kjN))m 1] dk (A.8)
To calculate the probability of a correct response explicitly, some assumptions
about the underlying distributions must be included.
A.3 Justification of the Gaussian assumption and
computation of the probability of correct
decisions
So far no assumptions have been made about the particular probability distri-
butions of events. There are two reasons for assuming that the underlying dis-
tributions of the (noise) events are Gaussian (Green and Swets, 1966). The first
- theoretical - aspect is the “central limit theorem". It states that the sum of
n independent, identically distributed random variables approaches a Gaussian
distribution for large values of n, irrespective of the particular distribution. On
the assumption that the internal noise that limits the resolution arises from the
combination of independent sensory events, the central limit theorem may be
invoked to justify the assumption of the Gaussian distribution.
The second - practical - reason is that Gaussian distributions are easy to
handle in mathematical calculations, e.g. the mean μ and variance σ2 are additive
under linear transformations. Furthermore, the likelihood ratio can easily be
computed if the signal is embedded in Gaussian noise.
In the following statistical analysis it is assumed that, due to the internal
noise, the representation e(t) of a whole temporal (acoustical) stimulus at the
time tν is given by the conditional density P(e(tν)jN) =: P(eν
jN) if noise alone
108 Appendix A: Contributions from Signal detection theory (SDT)
is present. It is characterized by P(e(tν)jS) =: P(eν
jS) if signal plus noise are
presented.
With the following simplifying assumptions:
ε P(eν
jS) has mean sν and variance σ2
ε P(eν
jN) has mean 0 and also variance σ2
the probability of a noise-alone-interval evoking a representation eν at time tν is
given by :
P(eν
jN) = 1
σ
p
2π
e (
eν)2
2
σ2
(A.9)
Given signal plus noise, the density function for the occurrence of the represen-
tation eν is denoted by :
P(eν
jS) = 1
σ
p
2π
e (
eν sν)2
2
σ2
(A.10)
On the assumption that the different samples eν are uncorrelated with each other,
the representation of the whole temporal stimulus is given by the product of the
sample densities, for example :
P(ejS) = ΠνP(eν
jS) (A.11)
Now the likelihood ratio can be computed. It maps a whole temporal interval
onto a positive real number.
l(e(t)) ≡ l(e) =
P(ejS)
P(ejN) =
Πν
1
σ
p2π
e (
eν sν)2
2
σ2
Πν
1
σ
p2π
e (
eν)2
2
σ2
(A.12)
If we take the natural logarithm and simplify this we obtain
() ln l(e) = 1
σ2
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
X
ν
eνsν
| {z }
cross correlation
1
2
ΔX
ν
(sν)2
| {z }
energy of s(t)
9
>
>
>
>
>
>
=
>
>
>
>
>
>
;
(A.13)
According to Eq. (A.13), the cross correlation between the expected signal s(t)
(“template") and the received signal e(t) is a monotonic function of the likelihood
ratio. According to the above explanations, the cross correlation is an appropriate
quantity for expressing a decision criterion that is optimal in the sense mentioned
above.
To be able to compute the probability of correct responses we need to know
the distributions of the likelihoods or cross correlations. If we regard the signals
A.3 Gaussian assumption and the probability of correct decisions 109
as vectors, the cross correlation is the scalar product of the Gaussian-distributed
event e(t) and the deterministic template s(t), so the correlation must be Gaus-
sian, too. If the detector's energy is normalized to 1, the distributions P(ljS)
and P(ljN) have the same variance σ2 as the distributions P(ejS) and P(ejN).
The mean of a noise interval is 0, the mean of the signal interval is denoted by
d. According to Eq. (A.8) the probability of being correct in an mIFC task is
given by :
Pm(correct) =
+1
Z
1
φ (x d
σ) Φ(x)m 1 dx (A.14)
with
Φ(x) =
x
Z
1
φ (x0) dx0 (A.15)
where φ(x) denotes the density of the standard normal distribution.
Therefore, according to Eq. (A.14), the probability of being correct depends
on d, σ2 and the number m of the observation intervals.
An alternative way of deriving Pm(correct) in Eq. (A.14) is by computing
the probability of the cross correlation value associated with the signal being
greater than the maximum of all m 1 cross correlation values associated with
noise alone. Cramer (1946) showed that the maximum of the noise samples has
approximately a Gaussian distribution. Since the difference of two Gaussian
“random variables" also has a Gaussian distribution, the difference between the
sample associated with the signal and the greatest noise sample must also have a
Gaussian distribution. Therefore Eq. (A.14) can be approximated by a Gaussian
integral with a mean μ[?3](m) and a variance σ[?3](m)2 (tabulated in Green and Dai,
1991) :
Pm(correct) π
d μ[?3]
(
m)
σ[?3]
(
m)
Z
1
φ(x) dx = Φ
d μ[?3](m)
σ[?3](m)
!
(A.16)
In our simulations, this integral must be calculated whenever the value of the
actual variable, which is in most cases the signal level, is changed. According to
Press et al. (1989) a closely related mathematical integral, the so-called error-
function erf (x), is easily computed :
erf (x) = 2
p
π
x
Z
0
e t2 dt (A.17)
Appendix B
Transformation characteristics of
the nonlinear adaptation circuits
For stationary signals an input value I produces a value of O =
p
I at the
output of the first feedback loop (derived from the stationary condition I
O
= O).
For a chain of n loops we obtain an output of O = 2
n
p
I. For n = 5 this approaches
a logarithmic transform. The model allows an input range of 100 dB. The linear
amplitude xmin = 10 5 is introduced as the “absolute" input threshold and is
set to 0 dB. The maximum input value is 100 dB, corresponding to a linear
amplitude of 1. Thus, in the state of rest with zero input, we get an output
value of 25
p
10 5 = 0:7. Consequently the input range of 0 to 100 dB will be
transformed to an output range of about 0.3 (= 1 - 0.7). This range of derived
output values was linearly mapped to the range of 0 to 100 model units (MU). For
a perfect log transformation, a change of 1 MU would correspond to a 1 dB change
at the input, irrespective of the input level (cf. Fig. B.1). With five feedback loops
we obtain an input-output characteristic, i.e., a transformation of the input signal
level (in dB SPL) into model units (MU), as shown in Fig. B.1. There is a small
deviation from a straight line which would represent a logarithm transform on
this scale. In the case of an input signal at a low level a certain increment of
the input level leads to a somewhat smaller increment at the output than in the
case of an input signal at a high level. Since we assume a constant sensitivity in
terms of output values (MU), this slight deviation from a logarithmic transform
predicts a smaller just-noticeable change in level at high input levels compared
with low input levels. The actual values for the just-noticeable change in level
for input levels of 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100 dB are 1.44, 1.13, 0.95 (compare section
I.D.), 0.82 and 0.80 dB, respectively. If the adaptation system is in its state of
rest, the first non-zero sample of a signal is not attenuated but will be divided by
a very small value f. This value is given by the product of the charging states of
110
111
0
20
40
60
80
100
0 20 40 60 80 100
Output level [MU]
Input level [dB]
Figure B.1: Transformation of the input level (dB SPL) into the output level
(model units MU) for the adaptation model containing five feedback loops.
the capacitors of the different lowpass filters:
f = Π5
n=1
1
(10 5) 1
2
n
= (105)31
32
(B.1)
Thus, the first sample will be multipliedby nearly 105. This leads to an overshoot.
After a short time, according to the different time constants, the charging states
will increase and therefore the following samples will be attenuated.
References
Bacon, S.P. and Grantham, D.W. (1989):
“Modulation masking: Effects of modulations frequency, depth and phase,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85, 2575{2580.
Bracewell, R.N. (1986):
“The Fourier Transform and Its Applications,"
Second Edition, Revised.
Bos, C.E. and de Boer, E. (1966):
“Masking and discrimination,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 39, 708{715.
Burns, E.M. and Viemeister, N. (1981):
“Played againSAM: Further observations on the pitch of amplitude-modulated
noise,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 70, 1655{1660.
Buus, S., Schorer, E., Florentine, M. and Zwicker, E. (1986):
“Decision rules in detection in simple and complex tones,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 80, 1646{1657.
Cramer, H. (1946):
Mathematical methods of statistics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Creutzfeldt, O.D. Hellweg, F.C. and Schreiner, C.E. (1980):
“Thalamocorticaltransformation of responses to complex auditory stimuli,"
Exp. Brain Res. 39, 87{104.
Cohen, M.F. and Schubert, E.T. (1987):
“The effect of cross-spectrum correlation on the detectability of a noise
band,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 81, 721{723.
112
113
Dau, T. and Püschel, D. (1992):
“Computermodell für die Detektion komplexer Schallreize,"
Fortschritte der Akustik DAGA '92, 877{880.
Dau, T. and Püschel, D. (1993):
“A quantitative model of the “effective" signal processing in the auditory
system," in Contributions to psychological acoustics, edited by A. Schick
(Universitätsgesellschaft Oldenburg, Oldenburg), 107{120.
Dau, T., Püschel, D. and Kohlrausch, A. (1996a):
“A quantitative model of the “effective" signal processing in the auditory
system: I. Model structure,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3615{3622.
Dau, T., Püschel, D. and Kohlrausch, A. (1996b):
“A quantitative model of the “effective" signal processing in the auditory
system: II. Simulations and measurements,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 99, 3623{3631.
Dau, T., Kollmeier, B. and Kohlrausch, A. (1995):
“Modeling modulation perception: modulation low-pass filter or modula-
tion filterbank?,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 3273.
Boer, E. de (1985):
“Auditory Time Constants: A Paradox?,"
in Time Resolution in Auditory Systems, edited by A. Michelsen
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York), 141-158.
Eddins, D. (1993):
“Amplitude modulation detection of narrow-band noise: Effects of absolute
bandwidth and frequency region,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 93, 470{479.
Egan, J.P., Lindner, W.A., and McFadden,D. (1969):
“Masking-level differences and the form of the psychometric function,"
Percept. Psychophys. 6, 209{215.
Fassel, R. and Püschel, D. (1993):
“Modulationdetection and masking using deterministicand random maskers,"
in Contributions to Psychological Acoustics, edited by A. Schick
(Universitätsgesellschaft Oldenburg, Oldenburg), 419{429.
Fassel, R. (1994):
Experimente und Simulationsrechnungen zur Wahrnehmung von Amplitu-
denmodulationen im menschlichen Gehör,
Doctoral Thesis, University of Göttingen.
114 References
Fassel, R., and Kohlrausch, A. (1995):
“Modulation detection as a function of carrier frequency and level," IPO
Annual Progress Report 30, 21{29,
Fastl, H. (1990):
“The hearing sensation roughness and neuronal responses to AM-tones,"
Hear. Res. 46, 293{295.
Fischer, F.A. (1967):
Einführung in die statistische Übertragungstheorie
BI Hochschultaschenbücher, Mannheim, Zürich.
Fleischer, H. (1981):
“Amplitudenmodulation von Terzrauschen: Experimente und theoretische
Ergebnisse,"
Acustica 47, 155{163.
Fleischer, H. (1982):
“Modulationsschwellen von Schmalbandrauschen,"
Acustica 51, 154{161.
Fleischer, H. (1982b):
“Calculating psychoacoustic parameters of amplitude modulated narrow
noise bands,"
Biol. Cybern. 44, 177{184.
Formby, C. and Muir, K. (1988):
“Modulation and gap detection for broadband and filtered noise signals,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 84, 545{550.
Forrest, T.G. and Green, D.M. (1987):
“Detection of partially filled gaps in noise and the temporal modulation
transfer function,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 82, 1933{1943.
Glasberg, B.R. and Moore, B.C.J. (1990):
“Derivation of auditory filter shapes from notched-noise data,"
Hear. Res. 47, 103{138.
Green, D.M. (1960):
“Auditory detection of a noise signal,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 32, 121{131.
Green, D.M. (1967):
“Additivity of masking,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 41, 1517{1525.
115
Green, D.M. (1985):
“Temporal factors in psychoacoustics,"
in Time Resolution in Auditory Systems, edited by A. Michelsen
(Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York), 122-140.
Green, D.M. und Dai, H. (1991):
“Probability of being correct with 1 of M orthogonal signals,"
Perception & Psychophysics 49, 100{102.
Green, D.M. and Swets, J.A. (1966):
Signal Detection Theory and Psychophysics
(Wiley, New York).
Green, D.M., Berg, B.G., Dai, H., Eddins, D.A., Onsan, Z., and Nguyen, Q. (1992):
“Spectral shape discrimination of narrow-band sounds,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 92, 2586{2597.
Green, G.G. and Kay, R.H. (1973):
“The adequate stimuli for channels in the human auditory pathways con-
cerned with the modulation present in frequency-modulated tones,"
J. Physiol. (London) 234, 50{52.
Green, G.G. and Kay, R.H. (1974):
“Channels in the human auditory system concerned with the waveform of
modulation present in amplitude- and frequency-modulated tones,"
J. Physiol. (London) 241, 29{30.
Hall, J.W., III (1987):
“Experiments on comodulation masking release," in Auditory Processing of
Complex Sounds, edited by W.A. Yost and C.S. Watson
(Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ).
Hartmann, W.M. and Pumplin, J. (1988):
“Noise power fluctuation and the masking of sine signals,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83, 2277{2289.
Holube, I., Colburn, H.S., Par, S. v. d. and Kohlrausch, A. (1995):
“Model simulationsof masked thresholds for tones in dichotic noise maskers,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 3411{3412.
Holube, I., Colburn, H.S., Par, S. v. d. and Kohlrausch, A. (1995):
“Simulationender Mithörschwellen von Testtönen in dichotischen Rauschmask-
ierern,"
Fortschritte der Akustik, DAGA '95, 783{786.
116 References
Houtgast, T. (1989):
“Frequency selectivity in amplitude-modulation detection,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85, 1676{1680.
Kay, R.H. (1982):
“Hearing of modulation in sounds,"
Phys. Rev. 62, 894{975.
Kay, R.H. and Matthews, D.R. (1972):
“On the existance in human auditory pathways of channel selectivity to the
modulation present in frequency modulated tones,"
J. Physiol. 225, 657{667.
Kohlrausch, A., Püschel, D. and Alphei, H. (1992):
“Temporal resolution and modulation analysis in models of the auditory
system," in The Auditory Processing of Speech, edited by M.E.H. Schouten
(Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, New York), 85-98.
Kohlrausch, A. and Sander, A. (1995):
“Phase effects in masking related to dispersion in the inner ear. II. Masking
period patterns of short targets,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 97, 1817{1829.
Langner, G. and Schreiner, C. (1988):
“Periodicity coding in the inferior colliculus of the cat. I. Neuronal mecha-
nism,"
J. Neurophysiol. 60, 1799{1822.
Langner, G. (1992):
“Periodicity coding in the auditory system,"
Hear. Res. 60, 115{142.
Lawson, J. L. and Uhlenbeck, G. E. (1950):
Threshold Signals, volume 24 of Radiation Laboratory Series,
McGraw Hill, New York.
Levitt, H. (1971):
“Transformed up-down procedures in psychoacoustics,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 49, 467{477.
Maiwald, D. (1967a):
“Ein Funktionsschema des Gehörs zur Beschreibung der Erkennbarkeit kleiner
Frequenz- und Amplitudenänderungen,"
Acustica 18, 81{92.
117
Maiwald, D. (1967b):
“Die Berechnung von Modulationsschwellen mit Hilfe eines Funktionss-
chemas,"
Acustica 18, 193{207.
Martens, J.P. (1982):
“A new theory for multitone masking,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 72, 397{405.
Mc Fadden, D. (1987):
“Comodulation detection differences using noise-band signals,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 81, 1519{1527.
Moore, B.C.J. and Glasberg, B.R. (1986):
“The role of frequency selectivity in the perception of loudness, pitch and
time," in Frequency Selectivity in Hearing, edited by B.C.M. Moore, (Aca-
demic, London), 251{308.
Moore, B.C.M., Glasberg, B.R., Plack, C.J. and Biswas, A.K. (1988):
“The shape of the ear's temporal window,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 83, 1102{1116.
Münkner, S. (1993):
Modellentwicklung und Messungen zur Wahrnehmung nichtstationärer Sig-
nale
Doctoral Thesis, University of Göttingen.
Münkner, S. and Püschel, D. (1993):
“A psychoacoustical model for the perception of non-stationary sounds," in
Contributions to psychological acoustics, edited by A. Schick
(Universitätsgesellschaft Oldenburg, Oldenburg), 121{134.
Oxenham, A.J. and Moore, B.C.J. (1994):
“Modeling the additivity of nonsimultaneous masking,"
Hear. Res. 80, 105{118.
Patterson, R.D. and Moore, B.C.J. (1986):
“Auditory filters and excitation patterns as representations of frequency
resolution," in Frequency Selectivity in Hearing, edited by B.C.J. Moore,
(Academic, London), 123{178.
Patterson, R.D., Nimmo-Smith, I., Holdsworth, J. and Rice, P. (1987):
“An efficient auditory filterbank based on the gammatone function," in Pa-
per presented at a meeting of the IOC Speech Group on Auditory Modelling
at RSRE, December 14-15.
118 References
Penner, M.J. (1978):
“A power law transformation resulting in a class of short-term integrators
that produce time-intensity trades for noise bursts,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 63, 195{201.
Plomp, R. (1983):
“The role of modulation in hearing,"
in Hearing { Physiological Bases and Psychophysics, edited by R. Klinke
and R. Hartman
(Academic, London), 270{275.
Plomp, R. and Bouman M.A. (1959):
“Relation between hearing threshold and duration for tone pulses,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 31, 749{758.
Püschel, D. (1988):
Prinzipien der zeitlichen Analyse beim Hören
Doctoral Thesis, University of Göttingen.
Rodenburg, M. (1972):
Sensitivity of the auditory system to differences in intensity
Doctoral Thesis, Medical Faculty of Rotterdam.
Rodenburg, M. (1977):
“Investigations of temporal effects with amplitude modulated signals,"
in Psychophysics and Physiology of Hearing, edited by E.F. Evans and J.P.
Wilson
(Academic, London), 429-437.
Schacknow, P.N. and Raab, D.H. (1976):
“Noise-intensity discrimination: Effects of bandwidth conditions and mode
of masker presentation,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 60, 893{905.
Schreiner, C. and Urbas, J.V. (1988):
“Representation of amplitude modulation in the auditory cortex of the cat.
II. Comparison between cortical fields,"
Hear. Res. 32, 49{65.
Schroeder, M.R. (1973):
“An integrable model for the basilar membrane,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 53, 429{434.
Sheft, S. and Yost, W. (1990):
“Temporal integration in amplitude modulation detection,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 88, 796{805.
119
Sek, A. and Moore, B.C.J. (1994):
“The critical modulation frequency and its relationship to auditory filtering
at low frequencies,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 95, 2606{2615.
Strube, H.W. (1985):
“A computationally efficient basilar-membrane model,"
Acustica 58, 207{214.
van Zanten, G.A. (1980):
“Temporalmodulationtransfer functions for intensity modulated noise bands,"
in Psychophysical and Behavioral Studies in Hearing,
edited by G. van den Brink and F.A. Bilsen
(Delft U. P., Delft, The Netherlands), 206-209.
Verhey, J.L. and Dau, T. (1995):
“Simulations of spectral masking with a model incorporating an optimal
decision strategy," in Contributions to psychological acoustics, edited by B.
Kollmeier
(Universitätsgesellschaft Oldenburg, Oldenburg), 107{120.
Viemeister, N.F. (1977):
“Temporal factors in audition: a system analysis approach,"
in Psychophysics and Physiology of Hearing,
edited by E.F. Evans and J.P. Wilson
(Academic, London), 419-427.
Viemeister, N.F. (1979):
“Temporal modulation transfer functions based upon modulation thresh-
olds,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 66, 1364{1380.
Viemeister, N.F. and Wakefield, G.H. (1991):
“Temporal integration and multiple looks,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 90, 858{865.
Viemeister, N.F. and Plack, C.J. (1993):
“Time analysis,"
in Human Psychophysics, edited by W.A. Yost, A.N. Popper and R.R. Fay
(Springer, New York), 116-154.
Yost, W.A. and Sheft, S. (1989):
“Across critical band processing of amplitude modulated tones,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 85, 848{857.
120 References
Yost, W.A., Sheft, S., and Opie, J. (1989):
“Modulationinterference in detection and discriminationof amplitudemod-
ulation,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 86, 2138{2147.
Zhou, B. (1995):
“Auditory filter shapes at high frequencies,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 98, 1935{1942.
Zwicker, E. (1952):
“Die Grenzen der Hörbarkeit der Amplitudenmodulationund der Frequenz-
modulation eines Tones,"
Acustica 2, 125{133.
Zwicker, E. (1953):
“Die Veränderung der Modulationsschwellen durch verdeckende Töne und
Geräusche,"
Acustica 3, 274{278.
Zwicker, E. and Fastl, H. (1990):
Psychoacoustics
(Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg).
Zwislocki, J.J., Hellman, R.P. and Verillo, R.T. (1962):
“Threshold of audibility for short pulses,"
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 34, 1648{1652.
Danksagung
Ich möchte Prof. Dr. Dr. Birger Kollmeier für sein stetes Interesse an der Weiter-
entwicklung des “Perzeptions-Modells", für sein in mich gesetztes Vertrauen und
nicht zuletzt für die hervorragenden Arbeitsbedingungen danken.
Prof. Dr. Volker Mellert danke ich für die Unterstützung während meiner Arbeit
und die Annahme des Korreferats.
Dr. Armin Kohlrausch möchte ich sehr danken für die zahlreichen intensiven
Diskussionen, sein großes Interesse an “grundlegenden" Fragestellungen und seine
enorme Motivationsfähigkeit auch in kritischen Phasen der Arbeit.
Bei den Mitgliedern des Graduiertenkollegs und der Arbeitsgruppe Medizinische
Physik möchte ich mich für die sehr angenehme Arbeitsatmosphäre bedanken.
Jesko Verhey danke ich vor allem für die intensiven Auseinandersetzungen mit
der Frage, “ob man das denn nicht auch analytisch rechnen könnte".
Martin Hansen, Dr. Birgitta Gabriel, Dr. Stefan Uppenkamp, Dr. Stefan Launer
und Dr. Andres Sander danke ich für viele anregende Diskussionen und eine
schöne gemeinsame Zeit in Oldenburg fernab jeglicher Physik.
Dr. Ralf Fassel und Dr. Stefan Münkner danke ich für die gute Zusammenarbeit
auf unserem gemeinsamen Forschungsgebiet, die vielen Hilfen in speziellen Pro-
grammierfragen und die netten Tage in Eindhoven und Göttingen.
Prof. Dr. Brian Moore und Dr. Andrew Oxenham möchte ich für die interessante
und sehr schöne Zeit in Cambridge danken. Ihre gesunde Skepsis und Kritik
gegenüber dem “Modell" hat zudem sehr zum Gelingen dieser Arbeit beigetra-
gen.
Danken möchte ich auch noch JoachimNeumann für die den Umständen eigentlich
nicht entsprechende entspannte Atmosphäre in den letzten gemeinsamen letzten
Tagen vor unserer Abgabe.
Lebenslauf
Ich wurde am 28. März 1965 in Hannover als erstes Kind von Joachim und Marion
Dau, geb. Neumann geboren. Von 1971 bis 1975 besuchte ich die Grundschule am
Welfenplatz in Hannover und wechselte 1975 auf das Gymnasium Lutherschule
in Hannover.
Nach dem Abitur im Juni 1985 nahm ich zum Wintersemester 1985 das
Maschinenbau-Studium an der Universität Hannover auf. Im Oktober 1987 legte
ich die Vordiplomprüfung im Fach Maschinenbau ab. Zum Wintersemster 1987
wechselte ich die Fachrichtung und begann mit dem Physikstudium an der Georg-
August-Universität in Göttingen. Im Oktober 1989 legte ich dort die Vordiplom-
prüfung im Fach Physik ab. Im April 1991 begann ich am Dritten Physikalischen
Institut unter der Anleitung von Prof. Dr. Manfred Schroeder mit der Anferti-
gung meiner Diplomarbeit mit dem Thema: “Der Optimale Detektor in einem
Computermodell zur Simulation von psychoakustischen Experimenten". Mein
Studium schloß ich am 26. Oktober 1992 mit der Diplomprüfung ab.
Von November 1992 bis November 1995 war ich als Stipendiat Mitglied des
Graduiertenkollegs “Psychoakustik" an der Carl-von-Ossietzky Universität Old-
enburg. Während dieser Zeit beschäftigte ich mich neben der Anfertigung der
vorliegenden Dissertation mit der Betreuung von Diplomanden und der Anleitung
von Studenten imRahmen des Psychoakustik-Praktikums an der Universität Old-
enburg.
Im Dezember 1995 war ich als wissenschaftlicher Mitarbeiter an der Univer-
sität Oldenburg im Projekt “Psychoakustische Modellbildung" tätig, das von der
Deutschen Forschungsgemeinschaft gefördert wurde. Seit Januar 1996 bin ich als
wissenschaftlicher Angestellter im Sonderforschungsbereich “Neuronale Grundla-
gen kognitiver Leistungen" an der Universität Oldenburg beschäftigt.
A new modeling approach of the “effective" signal processingin the auditory system was
developed which describes effects of spectral and temporal integration in amplitude-
modulation detection and masking. Envelope fluctuations within each auditory channel
are analyzed with a modulation filterbank. The parameters of the filterbank are the
same for all auditory filters and were adjusted to allow the model to account for mod-
ulation detection and modulation masking data with narrowband carriers at a high
center frequency. In the detection stage, the outputs of all modulation filters from all
excited peripheral channels are combined linearly with optimal weights. To integrate
information across time, a “multiple-look" strategy is implemented within the detec-
tion stage which allows the model to account for long time constants derived from the
data on modulation integration without introducing true long-term integration. Model
predictions are compared with both own experimental results and with experimental
data from the literature. A large variety of psychoacoustical experiments can be well
described by the model. This supports the hypothesis that amplitude fluctuations are
processed by modulation-frequency-selective channels. The model might also be used
in applications such as psychoacoustical experiments with hearing-impaired listeners,
speech intelligibility and speech quality predictions.
