HAL Id: inria-00567152
https://inria.hal.science/inria-00567152v1
Submitted on 18 Feb 2011
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access archive
for the deposit and dissemination of scientific re-
search documents, whether they are published or not.
The documents may come from teaching and research
institutions in France or abroad, or from public or pri-
vate research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est des-
tinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents scien-
tifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non, émanant
des établissements d’enseignement et de recherche
français ou étrangers, des laboratoires publics ou
privés.
HAL Authorization
Subjective and objective quality assessment of audio source
separation
Valentin Emiya, Emmanuel Vincent, Niklas Harlander, Volker Hohmann
To cite this version:
Valentin Emiya, Emmanuel Vincent, Niklas Harlander, Volker Hohmann. Subjective and objective quality
assessment of audio source separation. IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech and Language Processing, 2011,
19 (7), pp.2046-2057. ⟨10.1109/TASL.2011.2109381⟩. ⟨inria-00567152⟩
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING 1
Subjective and objective quality assessment of
audio source separation
Valentin Emiya, Member, IEEE, Emmanuel Vincent, Member, IEEE, Niklas Harlander, Volker Hohmann
Abstract—We aim to assess the perceived quality of estimated
source signals in the context of audio source separation. These
signals may involve one or more kinds of distortions, including
distortion of the target source, interference from the other
sources or musical noise artifacts. We propose a subjective test
protocol to assess the perceived quality with respect to each
kind of distortion and collect the scores of 20 subjects over 80
sounds. We then propose a family of objective measures aiming
to predict these subjective scores based on the decomposition
of the estimation error into several distortion components and
on the use of the PEMO-Q perceptual salience measure to
provide multiple features that are then combined. These measures
increase correlation with subjective scores up to 0.5 compared to
nonlinear mapping of individual state-of-the-art source separa-
tion measures. Finally, we released the data and code presented
in this paper in a freely-available toolkit called PEASS.
Index Terms—Source separation, audio, quality assessment,
objective measure, subjective test protocol
I. INTRODUCTION AND STATE OF THE ART
Audio source separation is the task of extracting the signal
of each sound source from a mixture of concurrent sources
(see [1], [2], [3], [4] for a review). It underlies a wide range of
applications from speech enhancement to content description
and manipulation [5]. In this article, we consider applications
where the estimated source signals are to be listened to, such
as speech enhancement for hearing aids, denoising of old
music recordings, and voice muting for karaoke. Separation
performance then amounts to the subjective judgment of lis-
teners. We focus on measuring and predicting the audio quality
perceived by normal-hearing listeners for any input data and
do not assess speech intelligibility or speech transcription, for
which speciﬁc metrics were proposed in [6], [7], [8]. One or
more kinds of distortions may be perceived depending on the
separation algorithm, including distortion of the target source,
interference from the other sources, and musical noise or other
artifacts [9]. Multi-criteria evaluation is therefore necessary.
Copyright c 2011 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. How-
ever, permission to use this material for any other purposes must be obtained
from the IEEE by sending a request to pubs-permissions@ieee.org.
V. Emiya and E. Vincent are with INRIA, Centre Inria Rennes - Bretagne
Atlantique, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France (e-mail: valentin.emiya@inria.fr;
emmanuel.vincent@inria.fr). N. Harlander and V. Hohmann are with Medi-
zinische Physik, Carl von Ossietzky-Universität Oldenburg, Oldenburg,
Germany (e-mail: niklas.harlander@uni-oldenburg.de; volker.hohmann@uni-
oldenburg.de).
This work was supported by the French Ministry of Foreign and European
Affairs, the French Ministry of Higher Education and Research and the
German Academic Exchange Service under project Procope 20142UD, as
well as by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research under
project number 01EZ0741 “Model-based hearing systems”.
Part of this study has been presented at the 38th International AES
Conference on Sound Quality Evaluation in June 2010.
A number of studies have been performed to assess the
subjective quality of certain source separation schemes [10],
[11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16], [17]. Most studies consider
either a single criterion, such as overall quality [10], [14],
[15], preference [13, p. 138] or musical noise salience [12],
[18], or a set of criteria restricted to speech [11], [16]. Three
such criteria called intelligibility, ﬁdelity and suppression were
proposed in [11, p. 95], while [16] employs the standard
ITU criteria for noise suppression [19], namely speech signal
distortion, background noise intrusiveness and overall quality.
Dedicated multi-criteria protocols are a promising extension
to established single-criterion protocols but have not been
investigated in detail yet. Besides, most studies consider a
single class of algorithms producing speciﬁc kinds and levels
of distortion, e.g. Independent Component Analysis (ICA) in
[13], time-frequency masking in [10] or simulated separation
in [16], and a narrow range of sound material, e.g. male speech
in [14], [17] or isolated notes from a single musical instrument
in [15]. The resulting scores can hence not be compared due
to the lack of a common absolute reference. Finally, some
test protocols are inappropriate or insufﬁciently documented.
Pairwise comparison tests are employed in [15], while joint
presentation is known to be preferable with large degradations
[20] such as those encountered in source separation. Also, the
protocols in [10], [12], [11] are not fully described, e.g. in
terms of sound normalization, sound presentation or subject
training, so that they are not exactly reproducible.
In parallel to the subjective studies [10], [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15], [16], [17], the objective evaluation of source
separation algorithms has also received some attention. A
common approach to evaluating the quality of an estimated
source signal is to compute the Signal to Distortion Ratio
(SDR) between the energy of the reference, i.e. the clean target
signal, and that of the distortion [9]. Two directions have been
investigated to derive additional objective measures. The ﬁrst
one consists of decomposing the distortion signal into several
components [9], related to e.g. target distortion, interference,
sensor noise and artifacts, and deriving a speciﬁc energy ratio
from each of the distortion components [9], [21]. These energy
ratios may further be combined using linear or nonlinear map-
ping to increase correlation with subjective ratings [15], [16].
However, the distortion decomposition algorithms proposed so
far do not always yield the expected components and one may
question the ability of energy ratios to ﬁt subjective ratings
since auditory phenomena such as loudness perception [22]
and spectral masking are not taken into account. A second
direction is to use auditory-motivated metrics to compare the
target and the estimated source. Existing metrics designed for
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING
audio coding or speech enhancement remain however limited
to the assessment of overall quality [23], [24], [25] and appear
to perform poorer than decomposition-based measures in the
context of source separation [15].
This article provides the following contributions for sub-
jective and objective quality assessment of audio source
separation: a principled multi-criteria subjective test protocol
dedicated to the evaluation of source separation (Section II),
a large database of 6400 subjective scores for a wide range of
mixture signals and source separation schemes (Section III),
a family of auditory-motivated objective measures based on
improved distortion decomposition (Section IV) and a vali-
dation of the ability of these objective measures to predict
these subjective scores (Section V). We provide in particular
additional evidence compared to [15], [16] that decomposing
the distortion into several components and combining the
resulting objective measures improves the quality prediction.
The sound material, the subjective data and the objective
measures are released as a toolkit named PEASS (Section VI.
We conclude in Section VII.
II. MULTI-CRITERIA SUBJECTIVE TEST PROTOCOL
The proposed subjective test protocol relies on the principle
of multi-criteria evaluation in a similar way as the ITU stan-
dard for the evaluation of noise suppression algorithms [19].
Based on previous work on the objective evaluation of source
separation [9], we propose a set of three speciﬁc criteria be-
sides overall quality which are dedicated to source separation:
preservation of the target source, suppression of other sources
and absence of additional artiﬁcial noise. We formulated these
criteria for experts in general audio applications so as to
avoid reference to speciﬁc source separation terms such as
interference and artifacts.
A. Protocol
We propose four separate listening tests, in which the sub-
jects are asked to address the following four tasks respectively:
1) rate the global quality compared to the reference for each
test signal;
2) rate the quality in terms of preservation of the target
source in each test signal;
3) rate the quality in terms of suppression of other sources
in each test signal;
4) rate the quality in terms of absence of additional artiﬁcial
noise in each test signal.
The tests are performed in the above order, with a break at
the end of each test. This is a major difference with respect to
the ITU P.835 standard [19]. In the latter, the overall quality
is rated after speech signal distortion and background noise
intrusiveness and required to be a combination of these two
subjective factors. In the proposed protocol, the global quality
is assessed ﬁrst for the opposite purpose: instead of aiming
for a global score combining the three speciﬁc scores only, we
want to relax their inﬂuence and allow global quality scores
to possibly involve other subjective factors at the expense of
a possibly larger variance.
The MUltiple Stimuli with Hidden Reference and Anchor
(MUSHRA) [20] protocol is employed for each test. This pro-
tocol is appropriate here since medium and large impairments
are encountered [14]. For a given mixture and a given target
source within that mixture, the subject is jointly presented with
several test sounds in a random order, including the results of
the source separation algorithms under test, the reference clean
target source and some anchor sounds introduced below. The
reference and the mixture are also available for comparison.
The perceived loudness of the reference should be adjusted
as much as possible to the same value for all mixtures. The
other test sounds may be normalized to the same loudness or
not, depending on whether erroneous scaling is considered as
a distortion or not [9].
A training phase is ﬁrst conducted where the subject listens
to all sounds of all mixtures (see Fig. 1(a)). This aims to train
the subject to address the required task, to learn the range of
observed quality according to that task and to ﬁx the volume
of the headphones to a comfortable level. A grading phase
is then performed for each mixture and target source where
the subject rates the quality of each test sound compared to
the reference on a scale from 0 to 100, where higher ratings
indicate better quality (see Fig. 1(b)). Sounds may be listened
to as many times as desired. The subject should make sure that
the ratings are consistent across mixtures (i.e. if one sound has
better quality than another, it should be rated higher) and that
the whole rating scale is used (i.e. sounds with perfect quality
should be rated 100 and the worst test sound over all mixtures
should be rated 0).
The guidelines of the test are presented as a unique written
document for all subjects in order to avoid any inﬂuence from
the supervisor of the test.
B. Anchor sounds
An essential aspect of the MUSHRA protocol is the use
of anchor sounds, i.e. artiﬁcial sounds presenting large im-
pairments of the same kind as those generated by actual
systems [20]. Precisely deﬁned anchors act as absolute qual-
ity levels and allow the comparison of ratings obtained in
different listening conditions or for different test sounds. In
the context of audio coding, several anchors reproducing the
distortions generated by audio coders were proposed in [20],
[26]. Anchors for the evaluation of source separation were also
introduced in [14]. We propose a new set of anchors inspired
from [14] which better ﬁt the target distortions and the artifacts
produced by actual systems. Each anchor is associated with
one of the three aforementioned kinds of distortion.
• The distorted target anchor is created by low-pass ﬁlter-
ing the target source signal to a 3.5 kHz cut-off frequency
and by randomly setting 20% of the remaining time-
frequency coefﬁcients to zero.
• The interference anchor is deﬁned as the sum of the
target source signal and an interfering signal. The latter
is obtained by summing all interfering sources and by
adjusting the loudness of the resulting signal to that of
the target.
• The artifacts anchor is deﬁned as the sum of the target
source signal and an artifact signal. In order to generate
EMIYA et al.: SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF AUDIO SOURCE SEPARATION 3
(a) Training interface (b) Grading interface
Fig. 1. Screenshots of the subjective test interfaces for the training and grading phases of task 1. The reference is not included in the test sounds of the
training phase.
musical noise, which can be deﬁned as “generated au-
dible isolated spectral components” perceived as “harsch
and artiﬁcial” [18], [27] or as “isolated [and] short ridges
in the spectrogram” [28], [12], the latter artifact signal is
created by randomly setting 99% of the time-frequency
coefﬁcients of the target to zero and by adjusting the
loudness of the resulting signal to that of the target.
Fixed choice of the time-frequency transform and the loudness
measure is needed for reproducibility. We consider the short
time Fourier transform (STFT) with half-overlapping 46 ms
sine windows (i.e. the square root of a Hann window) and the
ISO 532B loudness measure [29] because of its availability as
free Matlab software1.
III. DATABASE OF SUBJECTIVE SCORES
We collected a set of 6400 subjective scores by imple-
menting the above protocol via a dedicated interface. This
interface is available together with the test sounds, the anchor
sounds and the resulting scores within the PEASS toolkit (see
Section VI).
A. Test material and subjects
1) Test material: We selected 8 stereo mixtures and 2 4-
channel mixtures of 5 s duration from various datasets of the
2008 Signal Separation Evaluation Campaign (SiSEC) [30].
The target to be estimated was either the stereo spatial image
of one source in the former case or one original single-channel
source in the latter case [30]. These mixtures were chosen so
as to cover a wide range of source separation settings as shown
in Table I: two or more sources; instantaneous, anechoic,
convolutive or professionally-produced mixtures; male speech,
female speech, singing voice, pitched musical instrument or
drums as the target source. The target-to-interference ratios of
the mixtures ranged from −12 dB to 2 dB. For each mixture,
the 8 test sounds consisted of four sounds generated by
actual source separation algorithms, the reference and the three
anchor sounds. All references were set to the same loudness
using the ISO 532B standard. The sounds from actual source
separation schemes were obtained by 13 different algorithms
1http://www.auditory.org/mhonarc/2000/zip00001.zip
as described in [30]. From one mixture to another, different
algorithms were chosen in order to favor a wide range of
distortions and state-of-the-art separation methods.
2) Subjects: 23 normal-hearing subjects (excluding the au-
thors) participated in the test, including 13 in Rennes, France,
and 10 in Oldenburg, Germany. All subjects were experts
in general audio applications, as required by the MUSHRA
protocol [20]. They used the same AKG 271 headphones and
performed the test in different ofﬁces, in a quiet environment.
The guidelines were written in English.
# Mixture Type Target Interferences
1 Convolutive Speech Male Male, female
2 Convolutive Speech Female Male
3 Anechoic Speech
2 males Male & female
successively successively
Professional Music Male
2 guitars,
4
mix (rock) singer
2 keyboards,
bass, drums
5 Instantaneous
Music
Piano
Male singer,
(pop) bass
6 Instantaneous
Music Electric Acoustic
(pop) guitar guitar, bass
7 Convolutive Speech Male Female
8
Professional Music Female Acoustic
mix (bossa nova) singer guitar
9 Convolutive Speech Male 2 males
10 Convolutive
Music
Drums
Female singer,
(rock) electric guitar
TABLE I
MIXING CONDITIONS, TYPE OF SOUNDS AND NATURE OF THE TARGET
AND INTERFERING SOURCES FOR EACH OF THE TEN TEST MIXTURES.
B. Statistical analysis of the results
1) Detection of outlier subjects: A post-screening was ap-
plied so as to discard outlier subjects that may have misunder-
stood the guidelines. This post-screening was performed on the
scores related to the hidden reference and the anchor sounds
for all mixtures only. Indeed, a consensus among subjects is
expected over these sounds since they involve either no distor-
tion or a single kind of distortion. By contrast, subjects may
have individual rating strategies over the remaining sounds
involving multiple distortions due their individual perceptual
weighting of each kind of distortion.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING
We used the multivariate Mahalanobis distance-based outlier
detection technique in [31]. The set of subjective scores of
subject m is considered as a vector ym. Let us denote by d2
m
=
(ym
−µy
)Σ−1
y
(ym
−µy
)T the squared Mahalanobis distance
between ym and the empirical data mean µy
, Σ
y
being the
empirical data covariance. The distances dm are assumed to
be distributed according to a χ2 law [31]. Hence, by matching
the empirical and theoretical cumulative distributions, outliers
are obtained as points of the empirical distribution above the
0.975 quantile of the theoretical χ2 distribution [31]. In the
current case, 3 outliers were detected among the 23 subjects
and removed for subsequent use of the subjective scores.
2) Effect of location: To substantiate conﬁdence in the
results, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed re-
garding the subject location (Oldenburg vs. Rennes). We used
SPSS Statistics 12.02 with a signiﬁcance level of α = 0.05.
The two locations were a “between” factor while the four
tasks and the 10 mixtures were “within” factors. We obtained
highly signiﬁcant effects of tasks (η2 = 0.837) and mixtures
(η2 = 0.567), with all p < 0.05 and corrected F-values from
92.3 to 23.6. No signiﬁcant effect of locations was detected
(F(1, 18) < 1, p = 0.597, η2 = 0.01). As a result, location
did not have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the subjective scores.
3) Statistical analysis for hidden references and anchors: A
separate statistical analysis of the subjective ratings is provided
for the set of hidden references and anchors and for the
set of sounds from actual source separation schemes. The
statistical analysis related to the hidden references and anchor
sounds is presented in Fig. 2. It shows that for each task, the
hidden references were scored around 100, as expected, with a
very narrow conﬁdence interval (less than 1). The conﬁdence
intervals related to anchor sounds are wider, with half-widths
from ±1.4 to ±12.6.
Ref Target Interf. Artif.
0
50
100
Subj. score
Task 1 − Global quality
Ref Target Interf. Artif.
0
50
100
Task 2 − Target preservation
Ref Target Interf. Artif.
0
50
100
Subj. score
Task 3 − Other source suppression
Ref Target Interf. Artif.
0
50
100
Task 4 − Additional artificial noise
Fig. 2. Mean and 95% conﬁdence intervals of the subjective scores for the
hidden references and the three anchor sounds (abcissa) for each of the four
tasks (subﬁgures).
The mean values in Fig. 2 indicate that all anchors have low
scores for task 1 (global quality), as expected. For tasks 2 to 4,
2http://www.spss.com/software/statistics/advanced-statistics/
Tasks Min. Average Max
Task 1: Global score ±2.8 ±6.5 ±9.0
Task 2: Target preservation ±2.9 ±8.1 ±12.9
Task 3: Other source suppression ±2.4 ±6.5 ±9.7
Task 4: Additional artiﬁcial noise ±5.0 ±9.5 ±13.3
TABLE II
MINIMUM, AVERAGE AND MAXIMUM WIDTH OF THE 95% CONFIDENCE
INTERVALS (IN GRADING POINTS) OVER THE SUBJECTIVE SCORES OF THE
SOURCES ESTIMATED BY ACTUAL SOURCE SEPARATION ALGORITHMS.
the anchor related to the considered task has a low score while
the other ones have high scores, except for the distorted target
anchor in task 4. Indeed, the distorted target anchor presents
large distortions which do sound as artiﬁcial noise. Conversely,
the artifacts anchor does not have a low score in task 2 since
artifacts do not sound as target distortion. Thus, we see that the
three anchors involve independent distortions to some extent
only. Future investigations may be needed to identify the kinds
of target distortions that are subjectively correlated with the
target and design more independent anchors.
4) Statistical analysis for test sounds produced by separa-
tion schemes: The conﬁdence intervals related to the sounds
from actual source separation algorithms are summarized in
Table II. All half-widths are lower than 15, which is satisfying
given the width of the grading scale and of the same order
as in [14], [15], [16], [17]. Note that narrower conﬁdence
intervals were obtained for tasks 1 (global quality) and 3
(suppression of other sources), which indicates a slightly
higher agreement of the subjects on these tasks than on tasks
2 and 4.
IV. MULTI-CRITERIA OBJECTIVE MEASURES
We now design a family of four objective measures aiming
to predict the subjective scores of the above test. The proposed
approach consists of splitting the distortion signal into a sum
of components related to target distortion, interference and
artifacts, of assessing their perceptual salience using auditory-
motivated metrics and of combining the resulting features via
nonlinear mappings. The distortion components are extracted
using a new approach described in Section IV-A and validated
in Section IV-B, while the derived measures are detailed in
Section IV-C.
In the following, we consider a mixture with I channels and
J sources indexed by i and j respectively. The spatial image of
source j sampled at time t, i.e. its contribution to each mixture
channel i, is denoted by sij
(t). We assume that the true spatial
images of all sources are known. For a given target source j,
we evaluate the quality of source spatial image estimation [30]
by comparing the multichannel spatial image sij
(t) estimated
by some source separation algorithm to the target sij
(t). The
following derivations can be applied in a straightforward way
to the problem of source signal estimation [30] by replacing
these signals by the estimated and target single-channel source
signals sj
(t) and sj
(t) instead.
A. Distortion component model and estimation
Following [21], we split the distortion between the estimate
sij
(t) and the target sij
(t) into the sum of a target distortion
EMIYA et al.: SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF AUDIO SOURCE SEPARATION 5
component etarget
ij
(t), an interference component einterf
ij
(t) and
an artifacts component eartif
ij
(t) such that3
sij
(t) − sij
(t) = etarget
ij
(t) + einterf
ij
(t) + eartif
ij
(t). (1)
In order to perform this decomposition, one must specify
how the target distortion and interference components relate
to the true source signals. It remains unknown however how
the auditory system segregates the streams associated to these
components. One approach [21] is to assume that these compo-
nents are linearly distorted versions of the true source signals,
where distortion is modeled via multichannel time-invariant
Finite Impulse Response (FIR) ﬁlters. The algorithm in [21]
computes the coefﬁcients of these ﬁlters by two nested least-
square projections: ﬁrst, the distortion signal is projected onto
the subspace spanned by delayed versions of all source signals
skl
(t − τ), 1 ≤ k ≤ I, 1 ≤ l ≤ J, 0 ≤ τ ≤ L − 1, so as to
obtain etarget
ij
(t) + einterf
ij
(t); then it is further projected on the
smaller subspace spanned by delayed versions of the target
signal skj
(t − τ), 1 ≤ k ≤ I, 0 ≤ τ ≤ L − 1, so as to obtain
etarget
ij
(t) alone; ﬁnally, eartif
ij
(t) is deﬁned as the residual. The
ﬁlter length L is typically set to 32 ms [21].
Despite their use in several evaluation campaigns [21], [30],
[32], the resulting distortion components do not always ﬁt
those perceived by human listeners. This can be checked
by listening to the audio examples accompanying [9] or the
current article (see Section VI). For instance, one can often
hear the original sources when listening to the artifacts com-
ponent. This is due in particular to the time-invariant model
which does not ﬁt the time-varying nature of the encountered
distortions and to the constant frequency resolution of the FIR
ﬁlter which does not match that of the ear. A time-varying
decomposition was proposed in [9]. However, due to its large
computational cost, it was restricted in practice to ﬁlters with
both low frequency resolution and low time resolution [9] and
consequently did not improve the results. Another issue is that
the target distortion component may be nonzero even when
the target is not distorted. Indeed, due to the nested projection
algorithm, the target distortion component includes part of the
target source signal sij
(t) in addition to the interfering source
signals sil
(t), l = j, as soon as these signals are correlated.
The proposed decomposition algorithm aims to ﬁx these
issues and output more perceptually relevant distortion com-
ponents by approximating the auditory time-frequency resolu-
tion. As illustrated in Fig. 3, it involves three successive steps:
ﬁrstly, all signals are partitioned into time- and frequency-
localized signals via a gammatone ﬁlterbank [33] followed
by downsampling and windowing; secondly, a time-invariant
FIR-based decomposition is performed in each subband and
each time frame by joint least-squares projection; ﬁnally,
time-domain signals are reconstructed via overlap-and-add
(OLA) and ﬁlterbank inversion. Besides its desirable auditory-
motivated resolution, the ﬁlterbank makes it possible to de-
crease the ﬁlter length and hence the computational cost of
each decomposition. We now describe the details of each step.
3An additional residual noise component may be deﬁned when considering
noisy mixtures [9].
Fig. 3. Block diagram of the proposed algorithm for the decomposition of
an estimated source into the sum of the target source and three distortion
components corresponding to target distortion, interference and artifacts.
1) Time-frequency analysis: We split the estimated source
signal sij
(t) and the true signals of all sources skl
(t), 1 ≤
k ≤ I, 1 ≤ l ≤ J, into subband signals sijb
(t) and sklb
(t)
indexed by b using a bank of 4th-order gammatone ﬁlters
as implemented in [33], [34]. The center frequencies are lin-
early spaced on the auditory-motivated Equivalent Rectangular
Bandwidth (ERB) scale from 20 Hz to the Nyquist frequency.
This scale is approximately linear at low frequencies and
logarithmic at high frequencies. To ensure good reconstruction
properties, the number of ﬁlters per ERB is set to 3. All
subband signals are downsampled by a factor equal to the
ratio of the Nyquist frequency and the ﬁlter bandwidth i.e.
1 ERB4.
In each subband, the estimated source signal sijb
(t) and the
delayed true source signals sklb
(t − τ), 1 ≤ k ≤ I, 1 ≤ l ≤
J, −L/2 ≤ τ ≤ L/2, are partitioned into overlapping time
frames indexed by u via
sijbu
(t) = wa
(t)sijb
(t − uN) (2)
sτ
klbu
(t) = wa
(t)sklb
(t − uN − τ) (3)
where wa denotes the analysis window and N the stepsize.
We employ a sine window with ﬁxed length T and stepsize
N = T/4. Due to downsampling, this translates into variable
time resolution in the original time domain: the time resolution
in each subband is inversely proportional to its bandwidth.
Several window lengths are considered in Section V-C and
shown to be non critical.
2) Joint least-squares decomposition: Due to the wide
bandwidth of gammatone ﬁlters, the distortion components are
estimated by an additional ﬁltering in each subband and each
time frame. These components are deﬁned by multichannel
time-invariant FIR ﬁltering of the target source signal and
the interfering source signals, respectively, while the artifacts
4For simplicity, we also denote by t the time index after downsampling.
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING
component is given by the residual distortion:
etarget
ijbu
(t) =
I
k=1
L/2
τ=−L/2
αijbu,kj
(τ)sτ
kjbu
(t) (4)
einterf
ijbu
(t) =
I
k=1 l=j
L/2
τ=−L/2
αijbu,kl
(τ)sτ
klbu
(t) (5)
eartif
ijbu
(t) = sijbu
(t) − s0
ijbu
(t) − etarget
ijbu
(t) − einterf
ijbu
(t) (6)
Note that, unlike [9], [21], centered FIR ﬁlters are used and the
interference component explicitly excludes the target source j.
The ﬁlter coefﬁcients are computed by least-squares projection
of the distortion sijbu
(t)−s0
ijbu
(t) onto the subspace spanned
by the delayed source signals sτ
klbu
(t), 1 ≤ k ≤ I, 1 ≤ l ≤ J,
−L/2 ≤ τ ≤ L/2. Classically, the optimal (L + 1)IJ × 1
vector of coefﬁcients is given by αijbu
= S+
bu
(sijbu
− sijbu
)
where sijbu and sijbu are respectively the estimated and true
T ×1 vectors of target source samples, Sbu is the T ×(L+1)IJ
matrix of delayed true source samples and + denotes matrix
pseudo-inversion.
The ﬁlter length L is set to a constant. Various lengths are
considered in Section V-C. Again, due to downsampling, this
translates into variable auditory-motivated frequency resolu-
tion in the original time domain.
3) Time-domain resynthesis: Full-duration distortion com-
ponents are reconstructed from the time-localized components
in each subband using OLA
etarget
ijb
(t) =
u
ws
(t − uN)etarget
ijbu
(t − uN) (7)
einterf
ijb
(t) =
u
ws
(t − uN)einterf
ijbu
(t − uN) (8)
eartif
ijb
(t) =
u
ws
(t − uN)eartif
ijbu
(t − uN) (9)
where ws is a sine synthesis window of length T such that
u
ws
(t − uN)wa
(t − uN) = 1. Finally, the fullband dis-
tortion components etarget
ij
(t), einterf
ij
(t) and eartif
ij
(t) are obtained
using the synthesis ﬁlters [33] associated with the gammatone
ﬁlterbank. In order to account for inaudible but measurable
distortion due to ﬁlterbank inversion, the fullband estimated
and true target signals sij
(t) and sij
(t) are also reconstructed
from their subbands sijb
(t) and sijb
(t). These reconstructed
versions are used in place of the original signals from now on.
B. Evaluation of the signal decomposition
An objective evaluation of the distortion decomposition is
not obvious to design since reference signals for the dis-
tortion components are not available. Moreover, the creation
of synthetic reference signals is not possible since it would
imply some reductive a priori on the distortions, e.g. on the
choice of time and frequency resolution or on the deﬁnition of
artifacts. In order to validate the proposed method, the salience
of the distortion components obtained via the state-of-the-art
[21] (see Section IV-A) and the proposed decomposition are
compared in Fig. 4 over the data of Section III. Two series
of scatter plots are shown depending on the salience criteria
deﬁned hereafter in Section IV-C: either the energy ratios given
by (11), (12) and (13) or the features qtarget
j
, qinterf
j
and qartif
j
obtained from the auditory-based PEMO-Q metric [35] in (15),
(16) and (17). Circled items can be listened to as part of the
sound examples of the PEASS toolkit (see Section VI).
0 20 40
0
20
40
State of the art
ISR
−20 0 20 40
−20
0
20
40
Proposed decomp.
SIR
0 20 40
0
20
40
SAR
0.8 1
0.8
1
State of the art
qtarget
j
0.5 1
0.5
1
Proposed decomp.
qinterf
j
0.6 0.8 1
0.6
0.8
1
qartif
j
Fig. 4. Scatter plot of the energy ratios in dB (top) and the PEMO-Q-based
features (bottom) for the state-of-the-art distortion decomposition (y-axis) vs.
the proposed distortion decomposition (x-axis). The maximum value of energy
ratios have been limited to 40 dB. Circled items can be listened to as part of
the sound examples of the PEASS toolkit (see Section VI).
Many points are far from the diagonal dashed line, showing
that the proposed decomposition differs from the state of the
art for many of the tested sounds. In general, salience values
are differently distributed for the PEMO-Q-based criteria and
for the energy ratios. When listening to the artifacts compo-
nents, one can realize that the sources are well removed with
the proposed method whereas they can still be heard with the
state-of-the-art one. This can be observed in the right plots of
Fig. 4 where points are in the bottom part of the plots since
the artifacts components obtained with the proposed method
contains less energy. The proposed method also enhances the
relevance of the target distortion and interference components,
which results in scattered points in the left and center plots.
Note that in the left plots, the vertically aligned points on
the right side correspond to the interference anchor sounds
for which an almost ideal decomposition is obtained with the
proposed method thanks to joint projection onto all source
signals, while the state-of-the-art one erroneously provides a
nonzero target distortion due to nested projections.
C. Component-based objective measures
Given some decomposition of the distortion, like the ones
presented in [21] or in Section IV-A, we now aim to assess
the similarity between the estimated and the reference source
signal according to each of the four subjective rating tasks
of Section II. The state-of-the-art approach in the source
separation community consists in measuring the salience of the
overall distortion and of the target distortion, interference and
artifacts components by means of energy ratios called respec-
tively the Signal to Distortion Ratio (SDR), the source Image
EMIYA et al.: SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF AUDIO SOURCE SEPARATION 7
to Spatial distortion Ratio (ISR), the Signal to Interference
Ratio (SIR) and the Signal to Artifacts Ratio (SAR) [21]:
SDRj
= 10 log10
i t
|sij
(t)|2
i t
|sij
(t) − sij
(t)|2
(10)
ISRj
= 10 log10
i t
|sij
(t)|2
i t
|etarget
ij
(t)|2
(11)
SIRj
= 10 log10
i t
|sij
(t) + etarget
ij
(t)|2
i t
|einterf
ij
(t)|2
(12)
SARj
= 10 log10
i t
|sij
(t) + etarget
ij
(t) + einterf
ij
(t)|2
i t
|eartif
ij
(t)|2
.
(13)
These energy ratios do not always ﬁt the perceptual salience
of each component within the estimated source. For instance,
low frequency components affect more energy ratios than
perception. Also, the auditory masking of soft distortion com-
ponents by the target signal or by louder distortion components
is not taken into account.
In order to overcome these issues, we adopt the two-step ap-
proach in Fig. 5. First, we assess the salience of each distortion
component using auditory model-based metrics. Note that this
differs from the conventional use of such metrics, which are
applied to the overall distortion instead of individual compo-
nents [24], [25]. Then, we combine the resulting component-
wise salience features by nonlinear mapping, yielding a family
of four objective measures:
• the Overall Perceptual Score (OPS),
• the Target-related Perceptual Score (TPS),
• the Interference-related Perceptual Score (IPS),
• the Artifacts-related Perceptual Score (APS).
The details of each step are as follows.
Fig. 5. Block diagram of the proposed algorithm for the computation of the
OPS, TPS, IPS and APS criteria from the distortion components.
1) Component-wise salience features: We employ the per-
ceptual similarity measure (PSM) provided by the PEMO-Q
auditory model5 [35]. The perceptual salience of the overall
5When using the PEMO-Q software, the options delay compensation, pause
cut and level alignment are disabled since the signals to be compared are
aligned and silence segments or gain distortion must be evaluated.
distortion and of each speciﬁc distortion component is assessed
by comparing the estimated source signal with itself minus the
considered distortion. This yields the following four features:
qoverall
j
= PSM(sj, sj
) (14)
qtarget
j
= PSM(sj, sj
− etarget
j
) (15)
qinterf
j
= PSM(sj, sj
− einterf
j
) (16)
qartif
j
= PSM(sj, sj
− eartif
j
) (17)
where bold letters denote the single-channel vectors6 for all
time indexes t.
2) Nonlinear mapping: Following other objective mea-
sures [23], [35], [15], a nonlinear mapping is applied to
combine these features into a single scalar measure for each
grading task and to adapt the feature scale to the subjective
grading scale. We assume that the vector of features qjr
for a given task r involves either the four features qjr
=
[qoverall
j
, qtarget
j
, qinterf
j
, qartif
j
] or a subset of these.
Complex shapes of nonlinear functions can be simulated
by using several sigmoids. We employ a one hidden layer
feedforward neural network composed of K sigmoids, the
number of sigmoids being chosen empirically (see Sec. V-A).
Each feature vector qjr is mapped into an OPS, TPS, IPS or
APS score xjr
= fr
(qjr
) via the function
fr
(q) =
K
k=1
vrk g(wT
rk
q + brk
) (18)
where g(x) = 1/(1 + e−x) is the sigmoid function and vrk,
wrk and brk denote respectively the output weight, the vector
of input weights and the bias of sigmoid k. Table III presents
the various conﬁgurations of input vectors which are tested
and discussed in Section V.
The neural network parameters are trained using Matlab’s
fmincon optimizer so as to minimize the mean square error
between the predicted score xjr and the subjective scores yjrm
of all subjects m. This is equivalent to minimizing the mean
square error between xjr and the mean subjective score ¯
yjr.
V. EVALUATION OF THE OBJECTIVE MEASURES
We assessed the ability of the family of objective measures
proposed in Section IV to predict the subjective scores of Sec-
tion II. In particular, the following factors were investigated:
the use of the proposed distortion decomposition as opposed
to that in [21], the choice of the window and ﬁlter lengths T
and L, the use of PEMO-Q as opposed to energy ratios and the
various conﬁgurations of the feature vector. In order to ensure
a fair comparison, the nonlinear mapping deﬁned in Eq. (18)
is used in all cases to match the objective scores as well as
possible. In the case of energy ratios, the same conﬁgurations
of the feature vector are employed as in Table III with qoverall
j
,
qtarget
j
, qinterf
j
and qartif
j
being replaced by SDRj, ISRj, SIRj
and SARj respectively.
6PEMO-Q only handles single-channel signals. An extension to multichan-
nel signals can be obtained by concatenating all channels into a single one.
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Feature
vector
size
Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Task 4
1 qoverall
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
2 -
qtarget
j
qartif
j
-
qtarget
j
qartif
j
3
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
4
qoverall
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
qoverall
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
qoverall
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
qoverall
j
qtarget
j
qinterf
j
qartif
j
TABLE III
FOR EACH TASK (COLUMN), SEVERAL CONFIGURATIONS OF FEATURE
VECTORS ARE INVESTIGATED, DEPENDING ON THE NUMBER OF
FEATURES (ROWS).
A. Training and test data and evaluation metrics
In order to account for performance bounds due to subject
disagreement, we assess prediction performance with respect
to the individual subjective scores. For each task r, let us
denote by {yjrm
} the set of subjective scores of all sounds j
by all subjects m and by ¯
yr its mean. For a given objective
measure, we denote by xjrm the prediction of yjrm, which
does not depend on m, and by ¯
xr the mean of {xjrm
}. Each
objective measure is evaluated via the following criteria, as
deﬁned in [36]:
• the prediction accuracy given by Pearson’s linear corre-
lation coefﬁcient P
jm
(xjrm
−¯
xr
)(yjrm
−¯
yr
)
√
P
jm
(xjrm
−¯
xr
)2
√
P
jm
(yjrm
−¯
yr
)2
,
• the prediction monotonicity given by Spearman’s rank
correlation, i.e. the linear correlation coefﬁcient be-
tween nx
jrm
and ny
jrm
where nx
jrm
(resp. ny
jrm
) is the
rank of xjrm (resp. yjrm) after sorting in ascending order,
• the prediction consistency given by 1 − Ro, where the
outlier ratio Ro is the proportion of sounds j and subjects
m for which the prediction error |xjrm
− yjrm
| is larger
than twice the standard deviation of the subjective scores
for that sound7.
These criteria are expressed as real-valued ﬁgures between -1
and 1 or between 0 and 1.
The subjective scores collected in Section III were used both
to train the neural network parameters and to test the result-
ing objective measures. We considered three cross-validation
settings by splitting the data into a training set and a test set
according to the 10 mixtures, to the 20 subjects or both. These
settings did not signiﬁcantly affect the trends of the results. In
the following, we consider the most challenging setting aiming
to predict the quality of a novel sound for an unknown subject.
For each of 200 folds, the subjective scores of 19 subjects over
9 mixtures are used for training while testing is performed on
the scores of the remaining subject over the remaining mixture.
For each task and each feature vector, the number of sigmoids
K was adjusted between 1 to 8 so as to maximize accuracy.
7Note that outliers in the current section and in section III-B1 refer to
different deﬁnitions.
Note that a common way to evaluate the prediction per-
formance consists in correlating objective measures with the
mean opinion scores (MOS). We propose a more detailed anal-
ysis, involving MOS and individual ratings as in [24]: Table IV
presents the main performance results when either the MOS or
the individual ratings are used in the correlations, while only
individual ratings are used in the subsequent detailed analysis.
Table IV also shows the prediction performance depending
whether the hidden reference and the anchors are used or not
for evaluation – while training includes them in all cases. In
the subsequent analysis, hidden reference and anchors are not
taken into account in order to provide a realistic assessment
over sounds from actual separation algorithms.
Accuracy Monotonicity
OPS 0.61 / 0.79 / 0.90 0.55 / 0.74 / 0.76
TPS 0.46 / 0.70 / 0.79 0.44 / 0.62 / 0.78
IPS 0.60 / 0.72 / 0.87 0.59 / 0.69 / 0.82
APS 0.43 / 0.71 / 0.87 0.43 / 0.71 / 0.85
SDR 0.37 / 0.50 / 0.85 0.36 / 0.48 / 0.63
ISR −0.14 / −0.16 / 0.53 −0.07 / −0.07 / 0.35
SIR 0.72 / 0.85 / 0.94 0.67 / 0.79 / 0.88
SAR 0.31 / 0.52 / 0.88 0.31 / 0.55 / 0.84
TABLE IV
ACCURACY AND MONOTONICITY OF THE PROPOSED MEASURES VS.
NONLINEARLY-MAPPED STATE-OF-THE-ART FEATURES COMPUTED WITH
RESPECT TO: INDIVIDUAL SUBJECTIVE SCORES WITHOUT ANCHORS NOR
REFERENCES (LEFT), MOS WITHOUT ANCHORS NOR REFERENCES
(CENTER), OR MOS INCLUDING ANCHORS AND REFERENCES (RIGHT).
B. Choice of the decomposition parameters
As a preliminary experiment, we analyzed the performance
of the OPS measure for the prediction of global quality as a
function of the frame length T and the ﬁlter length L of the
distortion decomposition algorithm. The results are reported
in Table V for ﬁve different settings of T and L expressed
in ms at 1 kHz. All performance ﬁgures exihibit very small
variations on the order of ±0.02. Thus, these parameters do not
have a crucial inﬂuence. The optimal lengths corresponding to
T = 500 ms and L = 40 ms at 1 kHz are used from now on.
T1kHz (ms) 300 300 500 500 1000
L1kHz (ms) 10 20 20 40 40
Accuracy 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.61 0.58
Monotonicity 0.57 0.56 0.56 0.55 0.55
Consistency 0.86 0.86 0.86 0.87 0.85
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE OF THE OPS MEASURE AS A FUNCTION OF THE FRAME
LENGTH T AND THE FILTER LENGTH L OF THE DISTORTION
DECOMPOSITION ALGORITHM EXPRESSED IN MS AT 1 KHZ.
With these settings, the minimum value of the component-
wise salience features obtained by PEMO-Q was equal to 0.37,
0.76, 0.52 and 0.83 for qoverall
j
,qtarget
j
,qinterf
j
,qartif
j
, respectively,
while their maximum value was equal to 1.
C. Prediction of the global score with the OPS
Fig. 6 presents the main results regarding the assessment of
global quality. Performance is analyzed as a function of the
EMIYA et al.: SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF AUDIO SOURCE SEPARATION 9
chosen distortion decomposition algorithm, distortion salience
metrics and feature vector conﬁguration. The proposed OPS
measure achieves the best performance in terms of accuracy,
monotonicity and consistency and improves accuracy by more
than 0.2 compared to nonlinear mapping of the SDR. The
use of PEMO-Q instead of energy ratios results in a dramatic
increase of accuracy of more than 0.1. This deﬁnitely validates
the exploitation of auditory-based salience metrics. A smaller
improvement on the order of 0.02 is observed when replacing
the state-of-the-art decomposition [21] by the proposed one.
Finally, accuracy improves by about 0.1 when using all four
distortion salience features instead of a single feature corre-
sponding to the overall distortion signal. This conﬁrms that the
decomposition of the distortion signal into several components
is beneﬁcial even for global quality assessment, given that
listeners may associate a different weight to each kind of
distortion. Nevertheless, the performance of the OPS remains
somewhat below the upper performance bound corresponding
to performance of the MOS, which suggests that room is left
for future improvement.
Old+SxR New+SxR Old+PSM New+PSM
1 3 4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Accuracy
1 3 4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Feature vector size
Monotonicity
1 3 4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Consistency
Fig. 6. Global score prediction performance as a function of the size of the
feature vector, corresponding to different feature vector conﬁgurations shown
in the ﬁrst column of Table III. The four curves correspond to the use of the
state-of-the-art [21] (Old) vs. the proposed (New) distortion decomposition
algorithm and of energy ratio-based (SxR) vs. PEMO-Q-based (PSM) salience
features. The solid curves corresponds to the proposed OPS measure. The gray
lines indicates the upper performance bound corresponding to performance of
the MOS compared to individual scores.
An insight into the neural network trained in the best
conﬁguration – i.e. four inputs and one sigmoid – is given
in the ﬁrst row of Table VI. Weights show that the inﬂuence
of qinterf
j
and qartif
j
is much larger than the inﬂuence of qoverall
j
and qtarget
j
in the computation of OPS.
Table VII further compares the proposed OPS measure
with a number of objective measures for the evaluation of
denoising or coding [37], [38], [23], [39] and source separation
[15, p. 7] systems. These measures were scaled and shifted
vrk wrk brk
OPS (r = 1) 1340.9 0.1 −0.2 6.3 5.7 −14.4
TPS (r = 2)
625.2
1210.1
−0.7 8.4 0.8 −1.3
34.2 −27.0 7.0 −10.2
−9.1
−8.2
IPS (r = 3) 100.0 14.1 −11.9
APS (r = 4)
100.0
100.0
14.3
14.2
−14.5
−14.3
TABLE VI
PARAMETERS OF THE NONLINEAR MAPPING FOR EACH OBJECTIVE
MEASURE. EACH ROW OF A GIVEN CELL CORRESPONDS TO ONE SIGMOID
k AND EACH COLUMN OF wrk TO ONE INPUT FEATURE AS DEFINED IN
TABLE III.
Objective measure Accuracy Monotonicity Consistency
Energy ratio-based measures
SNR [39] 0.41 0.42 0.72
Segmental SNR [39] 0.51 0.48 0.80
Freq.-wei. seg. SNR [39] 0.59 0.52 0.84
Spectral distance-based measures
Itakura-Saito [39] 0.11 0.30 0.63
LLR [39] 0.39 0.46 0.76
Cepstrum dist. [39] 0.44 0.45 0.79
WSS [39] 0.46 0.46 0.78
Auditory-motivated measures
PEAQ [23] 0.45 0.54 0.75
PESQ [37], [38] 0.54 0.48 0.83
Composite measures
Fox et al. [15, p. 7] 0.23 0.20 0.34
Composite meas. [39] 0.61 0.56 0.83
OPS 0.61 0.55 0.87
TABLE VII
GLOBAL SCORE PREDICTION PERFORMANCE ACHIEVED BY VARIOUS
STATE-OF-THE-ART AUDIO QUALITY MEASURES COMPARED TO THE
PROPOSED OPS MEASURE.
so as to ensure a fair evaluation of consistency. The OPS
outperforms all concurrent measures. On average, conventional
auditory-motivated measures do not perform better than energy
ratio-based measures, while spectral distance-based measures
perform worse despite their appropriateness for speech recog-
nition [7]. The composite measure in [39] provides similar
accuracy and monotonicity to the OPS but lower consistency,
which indicates that the OPS generates fewer outlier values.
D. Prediction of speciﬁc scores with the TPS, IPS and APS
The results for the assessment of the preservation of the
target source (task 2), the suppression of other sources (task
3) and the absence of additional artiﬁcial noise (task 4), are
reported in Fig. 7. Performance is analyzed again as a function
of the chosen distortion decomposition algorithm, distortion
salience metrics and feature vector conﬁguration.
As a general trend, quality assessment is improved by the
proposed measures except for task 3, for which state-of-the-
art measures performed already quite well. For all systems,
the absolute values of accuracy and monotonicity for tasks
2 and 4 are about 0.1 to 0.2 lower than for tasks 1 and 3,
which show that quality is more difﬁcult to predict regarding
the former. This is mostly due to the fact that a larger
consensus between subjects was observed for the assessment
of interference suppression than for that of target preservation
and artiﬁcial noise.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Old+SxR New+SxR Old+PSM New+PSM
1 2 3 4
0
0.5
1
Accuracy
Task 2
1 2 3 4
0
0.5
1
Monotonicity
1 2 3 4
0
0.5
1
Consistency
1 3 4
0
0.5
1
Task 3
1 3 4
0
0.5
1
1 3 4
0
0.5
1
1 2 3 4
0
0.5
1
Task 4
1 2 3 4
0
0.5
1
Feature vector size
1 2 3 4
0
0.5
1
Fig. 7. Prediction performance of speciﬁc scores as a function of the size
of the feature vector, corresponding to different feature vector conﬁgurations
shown in Table III. The four curves correspond to the use of the state-of-the-
art [21] (Old) vs. the proposed (New) distortion decomposition algorithm and
of energy ratio-based (SxR) vs. PEMO-Q-based (PSM) salience features. The
solid curves correspond to the proposed TPS, IPS and APS measures. The gray
line indicates the upper performance bound corresponding to performance of
the MOS.
The beneﬁt of the proposed measures is important for
task 2. The TPS using all four distortion salience features
increases accuracy and monotonicity by 0.5 or more compared
to nonlinear mapping of the ISR in [21]. Again, this is due
both to the proposed distortion decomposition algorithm and
to the use of PEMO-Q. The parameters of the neural network
reported in Table VI show that one sigmoid mainly depends
on qtarget
j
while the second one mainly depends on qoverall
j
.
By contrast, the best results for tasks 3 and 4 are obtained
when using a single feature corresponding to the interference
component or to the artifacts component respectively. The
APS provides a smaller performance improvement on the
order of 0.1 compared to nonlinear mapping of the SAR
in [21] while the IPS provides small performance decrease
compared to nonlinear mapping of the SIR in [21]. Note that
an additional comparison showed that when using a single
feature, the use of non-linear mapping or of the raw feature as
a prediction measure do not change accuracy and monotonicity
signiﬁcantly. Hence, the main beneﬁt of non-linear mapping
comes from its ability to combine the features rather than to
provide a non-linearity across each feature dimension.
Hence, the major beneﬁt of the proposed measures concerns
the assessment of target distortion rather than that of interfer-
ence suppression and artiﬁcial noise. This can be explained by
the fact that the salience of target distortion is badly assessed
via an energy ratio due to the strong perceptual correlation be-
tween the target signal and the target distortion component. By
contrast, interference and artifacts components are relatively
independent from the target, so that fewer auditory masking
effects arise.
VI. THE PEASS TOOLKIT
We released the subjective test guidelines and the Matlab
listening test software of Section II, the 80 test sounds and
the subjective scores of Section III and Matlab software im-
plementing the OPS, TPS, IPS and APS measures proposed in
Section IV as a toolkit called PEASS, standing for Perceptual
Evaluation methods for Audio Source Separation8. All mate-
rial is freely available under either the GNU Public License or
Creative Commons licenses, except PEMO-Q which is free for
academic use only. Among all system conﬁgurations tested in
Section V, we select the one leading to the best accuracy for
each of the four measures, retaining the coefﬁcients reported
in Table VI. This toolkit can be used both for the evaluation
of existing and future audio source separation algorithm and
for the training of future performance measures. This toolkit
is also part of the evaluation measures used within the 2010
Signal Separation Evaluation Campaign (SiSEC) [32].
VII. CONCLUSION
We proposed a dedicated multi-criteria protocol for the
subjective evaluation of audio source separation and a family
of objective measures aiming to predict the resulting subjective
scores. Four quality criteria were considered, namely global
quality, preservation of the target source, suppression of other
sources and absence of additional artiﬁcial noise. We collected
a dabatase of 6400 subjective scores for a wide variety of mix-
tures and separation algorithms and showed that the proposed
OPS, TPS, IPS and APS measures increase correlation with
subjective scores up to 0.5 compared to nonlinear mapping
of the individual state-of-the-art SDR, ISR, SIR and SAR
source separation measures. These results show the beneﬁt
of a subband-based decomposition of the distortion signal
into multiple components and of auditory-based methods for
the assessment of the salience of each component, as well
as the need of combining multiple salience features for the
assessment of global quality and target distortion. While an
FIR spatial and time distortion model was used in gammatone
subbands, more results in the ﬁeld of auditory scene analysis
would be needed to design a truly auditory-based decomposi-
tion.
We hope that the proposed subjective test protocol could
become the basis for a future improved standardized subjective
test protocol. Also, we believe that the proposed objective
measures could be adapted to evaluate the perceived quality
in different application scenarios where the sources are not
directly listened to, but subject to remixing or simultaneous
8http://bass-db.gforge.inria.fr/peass/
EMIYA et al.: SUBJECTIVE AND OBJECTIVE QUALITY ASSESSMENT OF AUDIO SOURCE SEPARATION 11
3D rendering, enabling the evaluation of advanced rendering
attributes which cannot be accurately computed from the
mixture today. The target signal to be estimated would then be
the remix or the rendering of the true sources and the proposed
decomposition procedure could be used to decompose the
distortion into inteference resulting in spatial spreading of the
rendered sources and artifacts which may or may not be heard
depending on the presence of maskers.
REFERENCES
[1] D. L. Wang and G. J. Brown, Eds., Computational Auditory Scene
Analysis: Principles, Algorithms and Applications. Wiley/IEEE Press,
2006.
[2] S. Makino, T. Lee, and H. Sawada, Eds., Blind speech separation.
Springer, 2007.
[3] P. Comon and C. Jutten, Eds., Handbook of Blind Source Separation:
Independent Component Analysis and Applications. Academic Press,
2010.
[4] E. Vincent, M. G. Jafari, S. A. Abdallah, M. D. Plumbley, and M. E.
Davies, “Probabilistic modeling paradigms for audio source separation,”
in Machine Audition: Principles, Algorithms and Systems, W. Wang, Ed.
IGI Global, 2010.
[5] E. Vincent, C. Févotte, R. Gribonval, X. Rodet, É. Le Carpentier et al.,
“A tentative typology of audio source separation tasks,” in Proc. 4th Int.
Symp. on Independent Component Analysis and Blind Signal Separation
(ICA), 2003, pp. 715–720.
[6] D. P. W. Ellis, “Evaluating speech separation systems,” in Speech
Separation by Humans and Machines. Kluwer, 2004, ch. 20, pp. 295–
304.
[7] L. D. Persia, D. Milone, H. L. Ruﬁner, and M. Yanagida, “Perceptual
evaluation of blind source separation for robust speech recognition,”
Signal Processing, vol. 88, no. 10, pp. 2578 – 2583, 2008.
[8] M. I. Mandel, S. Bressler, B. Shinn-Cunningham, and D. P. W. Ellis,
“Evaluating source separation algorithms with reverberant speech,” IEEE
Trans. Audio, Speech and Lang. Proces., vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1872 –1883,
sept. 2010.
[9] E. Vincent, R. Gribonval, and C. Févotte, “Performance measurement in
blind audio source separation,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech and Lang.
Proces., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1462–1469, Jul. 2006.
[10] Ö. Yılmaz and S. T. Rickard, “Blind separation of speech mixtures via
time-frequency masking,” IEEE Trans. on Signal Processing, vol. 52,
no. 7, pp. 1830–1847, 2004.
[11] J. Joby, “Why only two ears? some indicators from the study of
source separation using two sensors,” Ph.D. dissertation, Department
of Electrical Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of Science,
Bangalore, 2004.
[12] S. Araki, S. Makino, H. Sawada, and R. Mukai, “Reducing musical noise
by a ﬁne-shift overlap-add method applied to source separation using
a time-frequency mask,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Conf. on Acoustics,
Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), vol. 3, 2005, pp. 81–84.
[13] R. Prasad, “Fixed-point ICA based speech signal separation and en-
hancement with generalized Gaussian model,” Ph.D. dissertation, Nara
Insitute of Science and Technology, 2005.
[14] E. Vincent, M. G. Jafari, and M. D. Plumbley, “Preliminary guidelines
for subjective evaluation of audio source separation algorithms,” in Proc.
UK ICA Research Network Workshop, 2006.
[15] B. Fox, A. Sabin, B. Pardo, and A. Zopf, “Modeling perceptual similarity
of audio signals for blind source separation evaluation,” in Proc. 7th Int.
Conf. on Independent Component Analysis and Signal Separation (ICA),
2007, pp. 454–461.
[16] J. Kornycky, B. Gunel, and A. Kondoz, “Comparison of subjective and
objective evaluation methods for audio source separation,” Proceedings
of Meetings on Acoustics, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 050 001–050 001–10, 2008.
[17] M. G. Jafari, E. Vincent, S. A. Abdallah, M. D. Plumbley, and M. E.
Davies, “An adaptive stereo basis method for convolutive blind audio
source separation,” Neurocomputing, vol. 71, no. 10-12, pp. 2087–2097,
2008.
[18] Y. Uemura, Y. Takahashi, H. Saruwatari, K. Shikano, and K. Kondo,
“Automatic optimization scheme of spectral subtraction based on musi-
cal noise assessment via higher-order statistics,” in Proc. of IWAENC,
Seattle, WA, USA, Sep. 2008.
[19] ITU, “ITU-T Recommendation P.835: Subjective test methodology for
evaluating speech communication systems that include noise suppression
algorithm,” 2003.
[20] ——, “ITU-R Recommendation BS.1534-1: Method for the subjective
assessment of intermediate quality levels of coding systems,” 2003.
[21] E. Vincent, H. Sawada, P. Boﬁll, S. Makino, and J. P. Rosca, “First
Stereo Audio Source Separation Evaluation Campaign: Data, algorithms
and results,” in Proc. 7th Int. Conf. on Independent Component Analysis
and Signal Separation (ICA), 2007, pp. 552–559.
[22] B. R. Glasberg and B. C. J. Moore, “A model of loudness applicable to
time-varying sounds,” J. Audio Eng. Soc, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 331–342,
2002.
[23] ITU, “ITU-R Recommendation BS.1387-1: Method for objective mea-
surements of perceived audio quality,” 2001.
[24] T. Rohdenburg, V. Hohmann, and B. Kollmeier, “Objective perceptual
quality measures for the evaluation of noise reduction schemes,” in Proc.
2005 Int. Workshop on Acoustic Echo and Noise Control (IWAENC),
2005, pp. 169–172.
[25] Y. Hu and P. Loizou, “Evaluation of objective quality measures for
speech enhancement,” IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech and Lang. Proces.,
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 229–238, Jan. 2008.
[26] T. Etame Etame, R. Le Bouquin Jeannès, C. Quinquis, L. Gros, and
G. Faucon, “Towards a new reference system for subjective evaluation
of coding techniques,” in Proc. 17th European Signal Processing Conf.
(EUSIPCO), 2009, pp. 914–918.
[27] Y. Uemura, Y. Takahashi, H. Saruwatari, K. Shikano, and K. Kondo,
“Musical noise generation analysis for noise reduction methods based
on spectral subtraction and mmse stsa estimation,” in Proc. of ICASSP,
apr. 2009, pp. 4433 –4436.
[28] Z. Goh, K.-C. Tan, and T. Tan, “Postprocessing method for suppressing
musical noise generated by spectral subtraction,” in Proc. of ICASSP,
vol. 6, no. 3, May 1998, pp. 287 –292.
[29] ISO, “ISO 532: Acoustics – method for calculating loudness level,”
1975.
[30] E. Vincent, S. Araki, and P. Boﬁll, “The 2008 Signal Separation Evalua-
tion Campaign: A community-based approach to large-scale evaluation,”
in Proc. 8th Int. Conf. on Independent Component Analysis and Signal
Separation (ICA), 2009, pp. 734–741.
[31] P. J. Rousseeuw and B. C. van Zomeren, “Unmasking multivariate
outliers and leverage points,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, vol. 85, no. 411, pp. 633–639, 1990.
[32] S. Araki, A. Ozerov, V. Gowreesunker, H. Sawada, F. Theis et al.,
“The 2010 Signal Separation Evaluation Campaign (SiSEC2010)– Part
II–: Audio source separation challenges,” in Proc. 9th Int. Conf. on
Independent Component Analysis and Signal Separation (ICA), 2010.
[33] V. Hohmann, “Frequency analysis and synthesis using a Gammatone
ﬁlterbank,” Acta Acustica, vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 433–442, 2002.
[34] T. Herzke and V. Hohmann, “Improved numerical methods for gamma-
tone ﬁlterbank analysis and synthesis,” Acta Acustica, vol. 93, no. 3, pp.
498–500, 2007.
[35] R. Huber and B. Kollmeier, “PEMO-Q – A New Method for Objective
Audio Quality Assessment Using a Model of Auditory Perception,”
IEEE Trans. Audio, Speech and Lang. Proces., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1902–
1911, Nov. 2006.
[36] S. Winkler, Digital Video Quality: Vision Models and Metrics. Wiley,
2005.
[37] ITU, “ITU-T Recommendation P.862: Perceptual evaluation of speech
quality (PESQ): An objective method for end-to-end speech quality
assessment of narrow-band telephone networks and speech codecs,” Feb.
2001.
[38] A. W. Rix, J. G. Beerends, M. P. Hollier, and A. P. Hekstra, “Perceptual
evaluation of speech quality (PESQ)-a new method for speech quality
assessment of telephone networks and codecs,” Proc. 2001 IEEE Int.
Conf. on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), vol. 2,
pp. 749 – 752, 2001.
[39] P. Loizou, Speech enhancement: theory and practice. CRC press, Boca
Raton, FL, USA, 2007.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING
Valentin Emiya graduated from Telecom Bretagne,
Brest, France, in 2003 and received the M.Sc. degree
in Acoustics, Signal Processing and Computer Sci-
ence Applied to Music (ATIAM) at Ircam, France,
in 2004. He received his Ph.D. degree in Signal
Processing in 2008 at Telecom ParisTech, Paris,
France. Since November 2008, he is a post-doctoral
researcher with the METISS group at INRIA, Centre
Inria Rennes - Bretagne Atlantique, Rennes, France.
His research interests focus on audio signal pro-
cessing and include sound modeling and indexing,
source separation, quality assessment and applications to music and speech.
Emmanuel Vincent (SM’10) received the mathe-
matics degree of the ÃL’cole Normale SupÃl’rieure,
Paris, France, in 2001 and the Ph.D. degree in
acoustics, signal processing and computer science
applied to music from the University of Paris-VI
Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, in 2004. From 2004
to 2006, he has been a Research Assistant with the
Centre for Digital Music at Queen Mary, University
of London, London, U.K.. He is now a permanent
researcher with the French National Institute for
Research in Computer Science and Control (INRIA).
His research focuses on probabilistic modeling of speech and music audio,
applied to blind source separation and information retrieval.
Niklas Harlander received the Dipl.-Ing. (FH) de-
gree in hearing technology and audiology from Old-
enburg University of Applied Science, Oldenburg,
Germany, in 2005 and the M.Sc. degree in hearing
technology and audiology from the University of
Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany, in 2007. He is cur-
rently working as a research associate at the Medical
Physics department of the University of Oldenburg.
His research interests include classiﬁcation, noise
reduction and perceptual quality estimation of audio
signals.
Volker Hohmann received the Physics degree
(Dipl.-Phys.) and the doctorat degree in physics (Dr.
rer. nat.) from the University of Göttingen, Göttin-
gen, Germany, in 1989 and 1993, respectively. Since
1993, he has been a Faculty Member of the Physics
Institute, University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Ger-
many, and member of the Medical Physics Group
(Prof. B. Kollmeier). He has been active in teaching
activities in physics for undergraduate and graduate
courses and has research expertise in acoustics and
digital signal processing with applications to signal
processing in speech processing devices, e.g., hearing aids. He is a Consultant
with the Hörzentrum Oldenburg GmbH. He was a Guest Researcher at Boston
University, Boston, MA, (Prof. Dr. Colburn) in 2000 and at the Technical
University of Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain in 2008. Dr. Hohmann received the
Lothar-Cremer price of the German acoustical society (DEGA) in 2008.
